
--- Summary of GENERAL EMPLOYEE RADIOLOGICAL .pdf ---
This Handbook describes an implementation process for core training as recommended in chapter 14, Radiation Safety Training. The Handbook is meant to assist those individuals within the Department of Energy, Managing and Operating contractors, and Managing and Integrating contractors identified as hav ing responsibility for implementing core training recommended by the RCS. This Handbook addresses many requirements of 10 CFR 835 Subpart J. It must be supplemented with facility-specific information to achieve full compliance. This Handbook was produced in Word and has been formatted for printing on an HP 4M (or higher) LaserJet printer. Documents downloaded from the DOE Radiation Safety Training Home Page Internet site may be manipulated using the software noted above. This page intentionally left blank. DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 Part 1 of 3 General Employee Radiological Training Program Management Guide Coordinated and Conducted for the Office of Health, Safety and Security. Training Program is designed to meet the requirements of 10 CFR 835-Subpart J. The training program is intended to address the following four issues: Goal of Training Program, Organizational Relationships and Reporting Structure, Proficiency Requirements and Training Program Description. 4 Instructor Training and Qualifications................................................................................ 5 Training Program Material Development........................................................................... 6 Training Material Presentation ....................................................................................... 6 Training Certificates .............................................................................................. 6 Training Aids, References ....................................................................................................... 6 training Program Standards and Policies........................................................................................... 7 Lectures, Seminars, Training Exercises, etc. .................................................................. 7 Delinquent Training/Failure Procedures and Policies .................................................... 7 Exceptions and Waivers.................................................................................................. 7 Administration ................................................................................................................. ... 8 Training Records............................................................................................................. 8 Training Program Development/Change Requests......................................................... 8 Audits (internal and external) ................................................................................................. 8 Evaluating Training Prog ram Effectiveness ................................................................... 8 References and Supporting Documents............................................................................ 10 EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS of RADIOLOGICAL TRAINING. This handbook describes the DOE General Employee Radiological Training program. It includes standards and policies as well as recommendations for material development and program administration. It is intended for use by DOE contractors for the development of facility-specific general employee radiological training. Training described in this handbook does not eliminate the need for additional training for facility-specific hazards. If the noted section is not applicable to the facility, no information is required to be presented. The site Radiological Control Manager or designee should concur in facility-generated radiological training material. General Employee Radiological Training (GERT) is provided to all site employees who receive occupational exposure during access to radiological materials. The training function may be performed by a separate training organization, but the responsibility for quality and effectiveness rests with line management. Employees must play an active part in maintaining exposures to radiation and radioactive materials within DOE limits and As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) GERT qualified individuals should be able to place the risks of working at a nuclear facility in perspective with other risks that we take in our everyday life. GERT Core Academic Training includes the following: Sources of Radiation, Non-ionizing and Ionizing Radiation, Risks in Perspective, Radiological Controls, Monitoring (Dosimetry), Emergency Procedures, ALARA Program, Employee Responsibilities, and Exposure Reports. Training should include selected fundamentals of the initial training with emphasis on seldom-used knowledge and skills. Training should be tailored to subjects for which trainee evaluations and experience indicate that special emphasis and depth of coverage is needed. A self-study method may be used, when possible, for retraining. Training staff (contractor and subcontractor, if used) should possess both technical knowledge and experience, and the developmental and instructional skills required to fulfill their assigned duties. Instructors should have the technical qualifications, including adequate theory, practical knowledge, and experience for the subject matter that they are assigned to teach.  DOE Order 5480.20A, “Personnel Selection, Qualification, and Training Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities,” discusses qualification requirements for instructors. Training materials for the core programs consist of lesson plans and study guides. Facility-specific materials must be added to the core materials when necessary.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 7Training Program Standards and Policies Lectures, Seminars, Training Exercises, etc. GERT core training programs are designed to be delivered in a classroom setting. An alternate delivery method may be implemented with computer-based training (CBT) equipment. General employees who are delinquent on retraining shall lose their status of having unescorted access to controlled areas. Successful completion of the core course for GERT training at one DOE site may be recognized by other DOE sites. The determination as to the adequacy of training as required by 10 CFR 835-Subpart J is the responsibility of the facility. Program changes and revisions should be submitted using the DOE Technical Standard Program form “Document Improvement Propos al’ F 1300. The GERT core training program materials and processes will be evaluated on a periodic basis by DOE-HQ. The evaluation should include a comparison of program elements with applicable industry standards and requirements.  DOE/HS has issued guidelines for evaluating the effectiveness of radiological training through the DOE Operations Offices and DOE Field Offices. For additional guidance, refer to DOE STD 1070-94, “Guide for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training Programs” Post-training evaluations will be used to identify opportunities for improving course materials and instruction methods and techniques. Retention testing will indicate when individual performance or testing fails to meet expectations. Corrective actions for deficiencies identified in retention testing will be incorporated in the individual’s development plan. The guidance provided in DOE STD-1070-94 is not meant to be prescriptive. Training organizations should review this guidance and determine its applicability, taking into consideration the existence of similar programs already in place at their facilities. Line management should monitor progress of program implementation. U.S. Department of Energy, Implementation Guide for Use with 10 CFR 835, “Occupational Radiation Protection.” DOE G 441.1B. “Reproductive Health: Effects of Chemical and Radiation on Fertility and the Unborn Child,” Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, February 1, 1984. This page intentionally left blank. Use this page to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page. At the bottom of the page, please share your feedback about this article. Elements of Article 613.7................................................................................... A-3 G. Qualifications of Evaluators............................................................................... A-4 H. Correlation Between Evaluation and Training ................................................... a-4 I. Training Requirements Based on Employee Duties.......................................... A- 4 J. Stakeholder Consensus .................................................................................... A-5 K. A Checklist for Establishing and Implementing a Post-Training Evaluation Program. Post-Training Evaluation and Retention Testing. Sample Sizes..................................................................................................... A-5 C. Interpreting Results ........................................................................................... A-6 III. GUIDELINES FOR COURSE POST-TRAINING EVALUATION AND RETENTION TESTING. The purpose of a training program and it s associated evaluation phase is to assure that workers are qualified to perform their jobs competently and safely. This purpose should be kept foremost while training is carried out. This page intentionally leaves blank the section "RCT Training" A-1 I. II................................................................................................................ A-13 E. RCT Training ................................................................................................... A-15 IV. The purpose of this document is to aid DOE sites in developing procedures and practices for conducting post-training evaluation and retention testing of the following core radiological control training courses: GERT, RW, and RCT training. A retention testing program differs from a post- training evaluation program in the usage of its results. This document provides guidance on the issues and practices that should be considered in setting up such programs. It is not intended to prescribe specific practices that must be followed by all sites. The diversity of conditions among the various DOE sites will require that the application of good practices may differ from site to site. Post-training evaluation has four primary purposes: 1. To measure the retention of skills and knowledge provided during training for extended periods following the training. 2. ToMeasure the degree to which the training is used on the job; 3. To provide feedback to improve the training; and 4. To measures the cost effectiveness of the training in the workplace. Each DOE site will formalize its Radiological Safety Training Post- Training Evaluation Program and Retention Testing Program in site procedures. Personnel engaged in post-training evaluation or retention testing will require some training or previous evaluation experience. Other radiological control training may be considered for evaluation along with core training.  DOE-STD-1070-94, "Guidelines for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training Programs," appendix, objective 8.0, "Training Program Evaluation," contains seven criteria. Three of these criteria are applicable to the purpose of these guidelines. Written testing would be best done in a classroom where quiet and privacy may be maintained.  DOE RCS, Article 613.7 states: Verification of the effectiveness of radiological control training should be accomplished by surveying a limited subset of former students in the workplace. This verification is in addition to performance evaluations routinely performed by training departments. The survey should consist of: - Observation of practical applications of the training; - Discussion of the course material with the trainee; and - An optional written examination, as appropriate, to measure retention. The results should be documented. The radiological control core training courses are nationally standardized. Site specific radiological control training may be evaluated and revised by that site. An essential element in the evaluation process is the development of consensus in advance of the evaluation. Agreement should also be reached on whether the evaluation will undergo the same approval cycle as that of other training materials. The retention testing program must be conducted in a manner that eliminates questions as to the fairness and unbiased manner in which the program is implemented. The following steps are essential in formalizing the post-training evaluation process and should be considered in developing site procedures. Post-training evaluation should be scheduled 3 to 6 months following the training. Site specific conditions may make it desirable to extend the period between training and evaluation. The subset of former students to be sampled should be large enough to provide valid and reliable data for meeting the needs of the training and radiological control organizations. Table 1 is a matrix that describes a suggested level of sample size that can provide an appropriate level of comfort. The percentages are based on the information provided in Dr. N.M. Dixon's "Evaluations: A Tool for HRD Quality ." Note that these sample size guidelines also apply to a retention testing program. Table 2 shows samples of the type of questions that could be asked for each of the four purposes for evaluating training. To measure the retention of skills and knowledge provided during training for extended periods following the training. to measure the degree to which training is used on the job. Evaluation Questions to ask of data. To measure the cost effectiveness of the training. To provide feedback to improve theTraining. DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 A-8 TABLE 2 (continued) Interpreting Evaluation Results To incorporate corrective actions into individual development plans based on deficiencies observed during the retention testing process. a. What percentage of ot her individuals performed satisfactorily in retention testing? b. How frequently were the unretained skills used on the job? c. How much remedial traini ng has the individual already received? It may be beneficial and appropriate at some sites to combine in-field practical exams with training content discussions. Discussion with employees should determine whether the knowledge acquired in the training has been transferred to the job. The intent is not simply to measure retention of specific facts. In-Field Observation: Some sites may desire to survey GERT trainees to determine their knowledge of hazardous areas to avoid. Awareness drills, such as placing mock radioactive material in an unauthorized location to assess responses are also effective. Written Exam: Written exams for evaluation of training effectiveness are optional. GERT trained employees are not required to pass a written examination. The following questions may be part of the discussion: How many millirem of whole body dose do you normally receive on your job in a year? How are employees at your work area warned of radiation hazards? What obligations do you have to maintain exposure to radiation ALARA? Table 3 is a sample chart that illustrates the in-field activities and weighting system that could be used to observe RW I trainees. The numbers shown are based on conditions and priorities at a particular DOE site. Sites could choose to develop scenarios or drills in which to conduct in- field observations, or simply observe workers in their normal working environments.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 A-11 Practiced ALARA (time, distance, shielding) 18 Completed task as per RWP 9 Stated appropriate actions to take when a radiation monitor alarmed 5 Verified survey instrument in operation 5 Surveyed for contamination properly (probe speed/distance, return probe to position) 12 Resurveyed area when needed.  RW I training has recommended objectives for the core course plus any site. Written Exam: RW I Training has recommended objective for the main course plusany site. Questions: How many millirem of whole body dose do you normally receive on your job in a year? Table 4 shows a sample chart that illustrates the in-field activities and weighting system that could be used to observe RW II trainees. The numbers shown are based on conditions and priorities at a DOE site. Sites could choose to develop. specific objectives added for the site.  RW II In-Field Observations Chart. Stated purpose of entry 3 Stated radiation levels and contamination levels (with units) 5 Selected protective clothing (PCs) and dosimeters in accordance with RWP. 5 Donned PCs properly 5 Dosimeters worn and pocket dosimeters periodically checked. 5 Verified survey instrument in operation 6 Surveyed for contamination properly.  RW II personnel enter all radiological areas and engage in activities requiring protective clothing. How many millirem of whol e body dose do you normally receive on your job in a year? When was the last time it was reported? What types of radiological hazards exist at your facility?  RW II training has recommended objectives for the core course plus any site specific objectives added for the site. Several approaches to retesting are being successfully applied throughout the DOE complex. Whichever pattern a site selects, the results should provide the data needed to meet the determined purposes of the evaluations. RCT training consists of several phases. Core lessons teach academic theory. In Phase II, practical skills are taught based on a site specific job assessment. Table 5 lists the tasks that will commonly appear in Phase II training. The top row lists work evolutions where these tasks might be observed. An alternative is to prepare a checklist to use during the observation. Table 6 shows a sample of such a checklist. Air Sampling Contamination and Radiation Survey Personnel and Material Release Survey Use of Counter- Scaler Equipment. Decontamination Access and Radioactive Source Control. Perform preoperational checks of radiation monitoring instrumentation. Don anticontamination clothing Remove DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 A-17 anticont contamination clothing. Post an area to reflect hazards. Document posting changes/updates. Brief subject RCT prior to commencing the field observation to relieve concerns about being observed. Perform a self survey or a survey of an individual for personnel release using portable contamination monitoring instrumentation. Use the reference number associated with each of the skills listed below. 1 Inadequate3 Adequate 5 Outstanding Did the RCT determine the background radiation level prior to commencing the personnel release survey? Was a thorough whole-body survey of the individual performed? Was the event documented in accordance with prescribed procedures? If the individual was confirmed to be contaminated, were the recommended steps taken to preclude the spread of contamination and to proceed to a decontamination facility? RCTs support radiological work and engage in all activities in radiological areas. The following questions could be part of the discussion: How many millirems of dose do you normally receive on your job in a year? What types of radiation are you exposed to in the course of your work? How do you protect yourself from these hazards? Each site should determine critical objectives to be retested for each lesson or class. Consideration should be given to the likelihood of a trainee having the opportunity to apply the skills from the training in an actual work environment. If the trainee is in training for an extended period of time, 2 to 4 months may pass without having had the chance to use the skills in actual work. "Guidelines for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training Programs ," DOE-STD- 1070-94 U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, D.C., Reaffirmed 1999. " Handbook of Training Evaluation and Measurement Methods ," Gulf Publishing Company, Houston, Texas, 1983. " Training For Impact ," Jossey-Bass, Inc., San Francisco, California, 1989. This page intentionally left blank. Use this page to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page. The Daily Discussion will help students understand today's featured news stories. Non-ionizing and Ionizing Radiation: Sources of Radiation and Risks in Perspective. Radiological Controls: Radiological controls and monitoring. Emergency Procedures: Emergency Procedures and Emergency Procedures. Employee Responsibilities: Employee responsibilities. Monitoring (Dosimetry): Monitoring and Dosimetry. This page intentionally left blank . DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 1TERMINAL GOAL: Upon completion of this training, the participant will be able to DISCUSS the hazards associated with radiological areas and radioactive material. General Employee Radiological Training (GERT) is offered by the Department of Health and Human Services. The course is designed to teach basic radiological fundamentals and radiation protection concepts. Participants will also learn about engineered and administrative controls, limits, policies, procedures, alarms, and other measures to control doses. Training is provided to all site employees who receive occupational exposure during access to controlled areas at a DOE site or facility. Additional training is required for employees who are identified as radiological workers. Every employee, both radiological worker and non-radiological worker, must play an active part in maintaining exposures to radiation and radioactive materials. Radiological Training Instructor’s Guide 3GERT qualified individuals should be able to place the risks associated with working at a nuclear facility in perspective with other risks that we take in our everyday life. Discuss: Relate the responsibilities associated with road signs to responsibilities with radiological postings. List examples of other activities that have risks (e.g., smoking, driving a car, eating fatty foods, etc.) The risks from these activities will be discussed later. EO1 - IDENTIFY basic radiological fundamentals and radiation protection concepts. Exposure to radiation does NOT result in contamination of the worker. Only in the case of an individual coming in contact with radioactive contamination would there be a potential for the individual’s skin or clothing to become contaminated. Insert facility-specific information if hazardous non-ionizing radiation sources are present. Radiation is energy emitted through space and matter. We are exposed to radiation from naturally-occurring sources in our environment, man-made sources, and even from materials inside our bodies. The average annual radiation dose to a member of the general population is about 360 millirem/year. The rem is the basic unit of measure used to equate the amount of potential biological damage done to our bodies by radiation. (1 rem = 1000 millirem) Man-made sources of radiation include the following: Medical uses such as X rays and nuclear medicine tests or treatments. Tobacco products. Building materials. Cigarette smoking 1300 (1 pack a day) 1300 • Radon 200 • Medical exposures 54 (average) 54 • Terrestrial radiation (rocks and soil) 28 • Cosmic radiation (sun and space) 28 Note that these are average figures and can vary significantly depending on the individual’s location.  DOE whole body radiation dose limit for general employees is 5000 millirem/year. occupational doses are very small and considered acceptable when compared to that of other occupational health risks. Sites typically have administrative control levels below the DOE limit. Individuals who complete only this GERT training are not expected to receive more.  DOE radiological workers who received measurable radiological doses had an average dose of 61millirem in 2005. Airline flight crew member 400-600 • Nuclear power plant worker 300 • Medical personnel 70 2. There is scientific evidence for health effects (primarily cancer) from radiation doses well above the annual limit. The risks associated with occupational doses are very small and considered acceptable when compared to other occupational and non-occupational risks. For very large doses received over a short period of time (referred to as an acute exposure), prompt effects (i.e., effects that appear shortly after the exposure) may result. These effects include reddening of the skin, vomiting, hair loss, or even death. The current rate of cancer deaths in the US from all causes is ~20%. Many things can cause cancer, including high exposures to radiation. A 25,000 millirem dose would result in an increased risk of cancer from 20% (background rate) to 21%. Radiation is one of many agents that may cause harm to the embryo/fetus. A 25,000 millirem dose to the fetus/embryo may increase the chance of a birth defect from 11% to 11.1%. The natural rate of birth defects in the US is ~ 11%. The risk of these effects occurring is minimized by having special protective measures for the embryo/fetus of a declared pregnant woman. This is a worker who voluntarily notifies her employer, in writing, that she is pregnant. It is the recommendation of DOE’s Radiological Control Standard that the employer provide the option for a reassignment of work tasks. Being unmarried male 3500 days • Smoking (1 pack/day) 2250 days • Being unmarried female 1600 days. Being a coal miner 1100 days • 15% overweight 777 days. Alcohol (US average) 365 days • Driving a motor vehicle 205 days • All industry 60 days • Radiation 100 mrem/yr (for 70 yr) 10 days • Coffee (US Average) 6 days b. The following activities create a risk of 1 in a 1,000. The estimated risk associated with occupational radiation dose is considered to be within the normal range of risk tolerance by national and international scientific groups. Accepting risk is a personal matter that each individual must make for themselves and is best made with accurate information.  controls to maintain radiation exposures As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA), and training of workers on radiation safety and emergency response. Only especially trained/qualified workers are permitted to enter areas controlled for radiological purposes or handle radioactive material. EO2 - IDENTIFY the relative risks of exposure to radiation and radioactive materials. Radiological material controlled for radiological purposes are identified by one or more of the following. Signs that have the standard radiation symbol colored magenta or black on a yellow background are used. Yellow and magenta rope, tape, chains or other barriers are used to designate the boundaries of posted areas. Postings are used to alert personnel of a potential or known radiological condition and to aid them in controlling exposures and preventing the spread of contamination. This training will permit you unescorted entry into the controlled area. Radioactive Material Area is an area within a controlled area where radioactive material in excess of specified quantities is located. “Radiation Area, High Radiation Area, and Very High Radiation area” identify areas where the hazard is exposure to ionizing radiation. “Airborne Radioactivity Area” indicates the potential for radioactive contamination in the air. Protective clothing is used to prevent contamination of personnel. A radiological buffer area may be established within the controlled area to provide a secondary boundary for minimizing exposures to radiation or contamination. Personnel trained at the GERT level are typically not permitted to enter these areas unless escorted and/or trained. The DOE and this Site are firmly committed to having a Radiological Control Program of the highest quality. ALARA is an integral part of all site activities. The purpose of the ALARA program is to control radiation doses in consideration of the overall benefit of the activity causing the dose. Radioactive contamination is controlled using engineered ventilation, containments, decontamination, and personnel protective equipment. In the unlikely event that a radiological incident occurs, it is important for each employee to know the emergency procedures. Do not touch or handle the material. Warn other personnel not to approach the area. Guard the area, moving a safe distance, and have someone immediately notify Radiological Control personnel. All employees have an impact on maintaining exposures to radiation and radioactive material. Work planning is a key component of the ALARA program to ensure each of the controls listed below is applied as appropriate to the work being performed. Some of the employee responsibilities are listed. Do not enter any radiological area unless escorted. Be alert for and report unusual radiological situations. Know where and/or how to contact Radiological Control personnel in your work area. Know the Administrative Control Levels and Dose Limits. Know your cumulative and annual dose. H. Monitoring (Dosimetry) Workers should become familiar with the equipment and devices used to measure and detect radiation and radioactive material. Since radiation cannot be detected with the human senses, special detection devices must be used. Monitoring is only required if you are likely to receive a dose in excess of 100 millirem in a year. It is possible based on your job function and location that you will not be provided a dosimeter.  DOE and DOE contractor employees who are only trained at the GERT level are not expected to receive occupational dose above the monitoring threshold. This could occur during escorted entries into radiologically controlled areas or in other circumstances. Individuals who are monitored for exposure at DOE facilities have the right to request reports of that exposure.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Instructor’s Guide 22. In this case an annual report is not required to be sent. It is important to understand what radiation and radioactive materials are and to recognize the postings associated with them. All employees are responsible to comply with the safety rules and to access only areas they are authorized to enter. Through an enhanced awareness of this topic, each employee may contribute to safe practices in the workplace. This page intentionally left blank. (Part 3 of 3) General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide. This page intentionally left blank. Use this page to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page. The weekly News Quiz tests students' knowledge of events in the story. Non-ionizing and Ioni zing Radiatio n (EO1)................................................ 4 B. Sources of R adiation (E O1)....................................................................... 6 C. Risks in Perspec tive (E. O2)........................................................................ 9 D. Radiological C ontrols (EO3) .................................................................... 14 E. ALARA Progra m (EO4)............................................................................................ 18 F. Emergency Procedur es (EO5)................................................................. 19 G. Employee Responsib ilities (EO4) ............................................................ 20 H. Monitoring (D osimetry)............................................................................. 21 I. Exposure Repor ts (D. N............................................................................................................... 4 This page is intentionally left blank. Use this page to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Discussion offers a chance for students to test their knowledge of events in the news. This course is part of the DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide 3I. The course is designed to teach basic radiological f undamentals and radiation protection concepts. The instructor will also teach you about the ALARA Program and how to use it. Radiological Training (GERT) is provided to all site employees who receive occupational exposure during access to controlled areas. GERT qualified individuals should be able to place the risks associated with working at a nuclear facility in perspective with other risks that we take in. Additional training beyond GERT is required for the employees who are identified as radiological workers.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide 4C. Introduce Objectives 1. Terminal Goal 2. Enabling Objectives II. Non-ionizing and Ioni zing Radiation (EO1) Non-ionizing radiation does not have enough energy to remove an electron from an atom. Radioactive Contamination Contamination is uncontained radi oactive material in an unwanted location. Exposure to radiation does NOT result in contaminat ion of the worker. The average annual radiation dose to a member of the general population is about 360 millirem/year. This amount is a combination of both natural background and man-made s ources of radiation. Natural background radiation is by fa r the largest contributor (about 300 millireM/year) to radiation doses. Cigarette smoking 1300 (1 pack a day) Radon 200 • Medical exposures 54 (average) Terrestrial radiation (rocks and soil) 28 • Cosmic radiation (sun and space) 28. Round trip US by air 5 • Building materials 7 • World wide fallout <1. The potential risks from occupational exposure can be compared to other risks we accept everyday. The risks associated with occupational doses are very small and considered acceptable when compared to that of other occupational health risks. The DOE whole body radiation dose limit for general employees is 5000 millirem/year. Average annual radiation dose for various occupations DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide 10DOE radiological workers who received measurable radiological doses had an average dose of 63 millirem in 2006. Airline flight crew member 400-600 • Nuclear power plant worker 300 • Medical personnel 70 2. For very large doses received over a short period of time (referred to as an acute exposure) prompt effect s (i.e., effects that appear shortly after the exposure) may result. These effects may include reddening of the skin, vomiting, hair loss, or even death. Heritable effects (i.e., genetic changes to the parents sperm and/or eggs that results in an observed effect in their offspring) from ionizing radiation have been found in plants and animals, but have not been observed in human populations. A developing embryo/fetus is especiall y sensitive to ionize radiation because of its rapidly dividing cells. Radiation dose to the embryo/fetus may increase the chances that the child will develop conditions such as slower growth or mental development or childhood cancer. The risk of these effects occurring is minimized by having special protective measures for the em bryo/ fetus of a declared pregnant woman. The risk of working with or around s ources of ionizing radiation can be compared to the risks we accept as part of everyday life. These data address the expected effect on the average life span of a large population of individuals subjected to the risk factor/behavior in question. Driving a motor vehicle 205 • All industry 60 • Radiation 100 mrem/yr (70 yr) 10 • Coffee (US Average) 6 b. The following activities create a ri sk of 1 in a million chances of dying. Smoking 1.4 cigarettes (lung cancer) Eating 40 tablespoons of peanut butter (air pollution) Radiological controls are established to protect individuals from unplanned or uncontrolled exposure to radiation and from ingestion, inhalation, or absorption of radioactive material. These controls include, but are not limited to, a unique system of identifying radioacti ve materials using certain colors and/or symbols. Yellow and magenta r ope, tape, chains or ot her barriers are used to designate the boundaries of posted areas. Tags and labels with a yellow background and a magenta or black standard radiation symbol ar e used to identify radioactive material. Potentially contaminated tool s, and portable equipment used for radiological work are marked.  Controlled areas are established around radiological areas to manage personnel access. Radioactive Material Area is an area within a crolled area where radioactive material in excess of specified quantities is located. “Contamination Area” and “High Contamination area” identify areas where the hazard is from accessible loose radioactive. “Airborne Radioactivity Area” indica tes the potential for radioactive contamination in the air. Protective clothing is used to prevent contamination of personnel. Personnel trained at the GERT leve l are typically not permitted to enter these areas unless escorted and/or trained.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide 19occupational dose from radiation and radioactive materials As Low As Reasonably Achievable. The purpose of the ALARA program is to control radiation doses in consideration of the over all benefit of the activity causing the dose. Do not touch or handle the material. Warn other personnel not to approach the area. Guard the area, moving a safe distance. Await Radiological Control personnel. decontamination, and lastly, personnel protective equipment to minimize the potentia l for inhalation, ingestion, or absorption of radioactive material.  DOE-HDBK-1131-2007 General Employee Radiological Training Student’s Guide 21 All employees have an impact on maintaining exposures to radiation and radioactive material ALARA. Work planning is a key component of the ALARA program to ensure each of the controls listed below is applied as appropriate. Workers should become familiar with the equipment and devices used to measure and detect radioactive material. Comply with emergency procedures for your work area. Know your cumulative and annual dose. M onitoring is only required if you are likely to receive a dose in excess of 100 millirem. Some workers are monitored for intakes of radioactive material (e.g., inhaling or ingesting radioactive material) This could occur during escorted entries into radiologically controlled areas or in other circumstances. I ndividuals who are monito red for exposure at DOE facilities can request r eports of that exposure. Each individual who is required to be monitored for radiation exposure at a DOE facility shall receive a r eport of that exposure on an annual basis. If requested, a written estimate of radiation exposure received by the terminating employee shall be prov ided at the time of termination. Note: As previously discussed, indivi duals may be monitored with a dosimeter even though they are not r equired to be monitoring. It is important to understand what radiati on and radioactive materials are and to recognize the postings associated with radiological work. All employees are responsible to comply with the safety rules. Through an enhanced awareness of this topic, each employee may contribute to safe practices in the workplace. 3. US NRC Regulatory Guide 8.29, “Instruction Concerning Risks from Occupational Radiation Exposure,” February 1996. 4. DOE Occupational Radi ation Exposure 2005 Report. 5. DOE 10 CFR 835, ‘Occupati onal Radiation Protection.’

--- Summary of RADIOLOGICAL SAFETY TRAINING.pdf ---
This Handbook describes a recommended implementati on process for additional training as outlined in DOE-STD-1098-99, Radiological Control. Its purpose is to assist those individuals, Department of Energy employees, Managing and Operating (M &O) contractors, and Ma naging and Integrating (M&I) contractors. The Handbook contains recommended training material s consistent with DOE standardized core radiological training material. In partic ular, this material may be useful for developing and providing the facility specific portion of the Gene ral Employee Radiological Training, Radiological Worker Training, and Radiological Control Technician Training. This page intentionally left blank. Overhead Transparenci es were produced in Microsoft PowerPoint 4.0. been formatted for printing on an HP 4M (or higher) LaserJet printer. Copies of this Handbook may be obtained from either the DOE Radiation Safety Training Home Page Internet site (http://www.hss.energy.gov) or the DOE Technical Standards Program Internet site. Training Goal, Objectives, Target Audiences, Prerequisites, Training Materials, Exemptions, Qualifications, Standards and Policies, Selection of Instructors, Test Administration, Program Records and Administration. Training Program Development/Change Requests, Audit (internal and external) This page intentionally left blank. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 is a program management guide. It provides guidance for proper implementation of training as outlined in DOE-STD-1098-99, Radiological Control. The guide is meant to assist those individuals, Department of Energy (DOE) employees, Managing and Operating (M&O) contractors. The goal of this training program is to provide a baseline knowledge for those individuals completing the training. Completion of the training provides personnel with the information necessary to perform their assigned duties. The DOE Office of Worker Safety and Health Policy and Reporting Structure (DOE HS-11) is responsible for approving and maintaining the training materials. The training function can be performed by a separate training organization, but the responsib ility for quality and effectiveness rests with the line management. It is the responsibility of management to select and send workers to training who need the content of the program. When workers can benefit from the course, they can be motivated to learn the content. A background and foundation of knowledge facilitates the trainee in learning new knowledge or skills. read the course descriptions along with the information about who should attend. Participants a nd DOE facilities alike will not benefit from workers attending training programs unsuitable for their needs. Training materials for the training program consist of a program management guide, an instructor’s guide, a student's guide, and overhead transparencies. This material is designed to be supplemented with updated or f acility-specific information. Supplemental material and traini ng aids may be developed to address facility-specific radiological concerns. Training Delivery Sites are encouraged to expand and enhance the training materials through advanced training technologies. Computer-based training and multimedia are samples of such technologies. Qualified personnel can be exempt from training if they have satisfactorily completed training programs. Documentation of the applicable and exempted portions of training should be maintained. The technical instructor must understand thoroughly all aspects of the subjects being taught. The instructor must have the skills and knowledge to employ the instructional methods and techniques that will enhance learning. The qualifications are based on the best industry practices that employ performance-based instruction and quality assurances. Instructors must possess technical competence (theoretical and practical knowledge along with work experience) in the subject areas in which they conduct training. Methods for verifying the appropriate level of technical competence may include the review of prior training. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 5 Training Program Standards and Policies (continued) To maintain technical competence, a technical instructor should continue to perform satisfactorily on the job and participate in continuing technical training. Demonstrated knowledge and skills in radiation protection, above the level to be achieved by the trainees, as evidenced by previous training/education and through job performance. Instructional capability qualification should be granted at the successful completion of an approved professional development program for training instructors. The program should contain theory and practice of instructi onal skills and techniques, adult learning, planning, conducting, and evaluating classroom, simulator, laboratory, and on-the-job training activities. The appropriate methodology required to present the instructional content will indicate a required level of instructional qualification and skill. Current instructors' training, education, and job performance should be reviewed to determine their training needs for particular courses. Management may provide exemptions based on de monstrated proficiency in performing technical instructor's tasks. Instructor must communicate, verbally and non-verbally, lessons to enhance learning. Invoke student interaction through questions and student activity. Provide positive feedback to students. Use appropriate instructional materials and visual aids to meet the lesson objectives. Administer performance and written tests. Interview possible instructors to ensure they understand the importance of the roles and responsibilities of technical instructors. Maintain records of previous training, education, and work experience. A test bank of questions for each course that has an exam should be developed and content validated. The questions contained in the test bank are linked directly to the objectives for each course. The test outcomes can also be used to document competence and the acquisition of knowledge. If numerous trainees fail to correctly answer a valid set of questions for an objective, the instruction for that objective needs to be reviewed for deficiencies. Tests are randomly generated from the test bank. All test bank items are content validated by a subject matter expert. Test banks are secured and are not released either before or after the test is administered. Trainees should receive feedback on their test performance. A minimum of 80% should be required for a passing score.  DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 11 Training Program Standards and Policies (continued) Program Records and Training records and documentation shall meet the Administration requirements of 10 CFR 835.704 Training Program. All requests for program changes and revisions should be made to the Administration. Internal verification of training effectiveness should be accomplished through senior instructor or supervisor observation of practical applications and discussions of course material. All results should be documented and maintained by the organization responsible for Radiological Control training. The evaluation should include a comparison of program elements with applicable industry standards and requirements. Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities. The student will have a basic understanding of the characteristics of uranium and the precautions needed for working in an uranium facility. Target Audience Individuals who have been assigned duties in uranium facilities. These individuals, depending on their job responsibilities, typically would include Radiological Workers. This course illustrates and rein forces the skills and knowledge needed to provide personnel with an understanding of the characteristics of uranium. This course is developed in accordance with Article 662 of the RCS. The course material may be useful in developing and providing the facility specific portion of existing standardized core training. Worker I training is recommended as a prerequisite. Retraining is not required for this course unless it is used to meet 10 CFR 835 training requirements. Some of the content is determined on a facility-specific basis. Retraini ng should also be provided as facility specific information changes. At least five years of applied radiological protection experience in an operating radiological facility is preferred. The areas of experience should include: Radiological controls associated with uranium. Conducting surveys and monitori ng at uranium facilities. o Conducting inspections of the uranium facility. Instructors should be able to effectively communicate, verbally and non-verbally, lessons to enhance learning. Intimate knowledge of Federal regulations and guidance. Knowledge of best nuclear industry practices pertaining to radiological protection in uranium facilities. All materials are provided in Word format except for overhead transparencies. U.S. Department of Energy, Guidelines for Evaluation of Nuclear Facility Training Programs. Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection (2007). Los Alamos National Laboratory, Nuclear Criticality. a part of this document to the extent specified herein. Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities Instructor's Guide Office of Health, Safety and Security U.S. Department of Energy. Safety Guide , LA-12808, 1996. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 16 This page intentionally left blank. This page intentionally left blank. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 1 Course Goal: The student will have a basic understanding of the characteristics of uranium. Target Audience: Individuals who have been assigned duties in uranium facilities. Depending on the facility, portions of the material may be applicable to General. This course illustrates and rein forces the skills and knowledge needed to provide personnel with an understanding of the characteristics of uranium. This course is developed in accordance with Article 662 of the RCS. The course material may be useful in developing and providing the facility specific portion of existing standardized core training. Terminal Objective: At the end of this training, the student will have a basic understanding of the characteristics of uranium and the precautions needed for working in an uranium facility. Enabling Objectives: EO1 Describe the physical, radioactive, toxicological, and chemical effects of uranium. Training Aids: Overhead transparencies (may be supplemented or substituted with updated or facility-specific information) Equipment Needs: Over head projector • Screen • Flip chart or white board • Markers Student Materials: Student’s Guide Printouts of Overhead Transparencies Bibliography: DOE standards, handbooks, and technical standards lists (TSLs) Introduce self to the participants and establish rapport. Define logistics: o Safety. Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection (2007) Los Alamos National Laboratory, Nuclear Criticality Safety Guide , LA- 12808. Students will learn the characteristics of uranium and radiological precautions necessar y for working at a uranium facility. Remind participants that they need to have comp leted Radiological Worker training prior to or in conjunction with this course. Students should be fam iliar with terms like rem, contamination, etc. This training should be used to supplement the Radiological Worker training materials for personnel working at or having access to DOE uranium facilities. This training is multi-faceted, and different sections can be applied to various target groups. Describe the physical, radioactive, toxicological, and chemical effects of uranium. The solid forms of uranium are generally the most stable configurations. The shiny, silvery metal form is rarely seen except in a workshop when it is being machined. After machining, the surface oxidizes, typically within hours, to a hard, black surface. Orange or yellow colored surfaces are usually more flaky and soluble. Radioactive decay products, such as radium and thorium, float to the surface. Airborne uranium may be inhaled and absorbed into the bloodstream through the lungs. Water decreases the quantity of enriched uranium required for criticality. This topic will be discussed in Module 105 – Criticality Safety. Uranium- 232 ( 232U), uranium-235 (235U), and uranium-238 (238U) each has a radon daughter. Radon is a gas at all but very low temperatures; therefore, if the radon escapes, the subsequent daughters can accumulate in closed or poorly ventilated areas. UF 6 reacts in moist air to produce hydrogen fluoride (HF) gas. This gas is extremely corrosive and can severely damage the eyes, skin and lungs. As the escaping UF 6 gas cools, it becomes particulate, which may have a suffocating effect on any nearby workers. Uranium in its pure metal form is a silvery, gray metal. It is the heaviest naturally occurring element. There are 18 separate isotopes of uranium. Two isotopes, 233U and 235U, are fissile, which can be helpful or harmful. Criticality is discussed in more detail in Module 105- Criticality Safety. A fissile material can be involved in a criticality accident, resulting in the release of a lethal amount of radiation. The degree of enrichment also affects the controls that are required for external radiation exposure because of the increase in the amount of gamma-emitting 235U. There are several isotopes of uranium, only three exist naturally, and all three are radioactive. See the table below for half-lives and natural percent abundance for important uranium isotopes in the nuclear fuel cycle. products of 232U represent a potential gamma emission hazard. 238U 4.5 x 10 9 y ~99.3% The most abundant uranium isotope. If not handled safely, an accumulation of 235U could become critical. 236U 2.3 x 10 7 y 0% Some 235U is converted to 236U in reactors. It is also present in reprocessed reactor fuel. Uranium is a fissionable material, which means it can undergo nuclear fission. Nuclear fission is a process in which a very heavy, unstable atom splits in two, or “fissions” Discuss decay products resulting in radiological concerns at your facility. Uranium is chemically reactive. It burns in air like magnesium; it is toxic like lead; and it forms a large variety of chemical compounds. All the isotopes of uranium have the same chemical reactivity. All can be made into the many different physical and chemical forms discussed in this section. The potential for a fire is greatest when the uranium is in a finely divided form, such as milling chips or filings. In this form, uranium can undergo spontaneous ignition. Precautions must be taken to prevent chips and filings from igniting. Water or oil baths for collecting and storing chips needs to be evaluated. Once uranium starts to burn, it is extremely difficult to extinguish. None of the typical extinguishing methods, such as water, carbon dioxide, or halon, is effective in fighting uranium fires. In fact, halon may be explosive and produce toxic fumes if used directly on the fire. The human system is due to either inhalation or ingestion. Uranium tends to concentrate in the kidneys and the bones. Internal exposure to uranium is controlled by limiting the ingestion and inhalation of this element. These methods, along with measurement techniques, are discussed in Module 104. As the enrichment of the uranium in the 235U isotope increases, so too do the effects of radiation exposure in relation to toxicological effects. The principal radiological hazard associated with uranium is due to the relatively high energy alpha particles it emits. A chronic exposure to these radionuclides result in an increased risk of cancer. The chemistry of uranium is complicated. For example, uranium forms several oxides: UO, UO 2 UO 3, and UO 4. A sample of uranium oxide will include a mixture of several of these. The higher oxides usually flake of more easily and are usually more soluble in water. Uranium reacts readily with air and water. When uranium is machined, small chips catch fire from the heat of the machining process. Uranium hexafluoride (UF 6) reacts in moist air to produce hydrogen fluoride (HF) gas. Uranium is a naturally occurring element used primarily for producing energy with nuclear reactors and developing nuclear weapons. Historically, uranium was used for hundreds of years to color glass and as a glaze for tile and pottery. Bright orange “Fiesta-ware” dinner plates were prized for their color without any awareness of their radioactivity. The original discovery of radioactivity involved uranium. In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium would cause photographic film to become fogged. Later investigators, such as Marie Curie, isolated other radioactive elements from uranium ores. These elements are produced from the radioactive decay of uranium. Radon is a heavy radioactive gas that can accumulate in buildings and mines. Typically, these radioactive decay products are more hazardous than the uranium itself. The importance of uranium increased dramatically with the discovery of nuclear fission in 1938. These products were used to assemble the first atomic bombs at Los Alamos in 1945. Uranium is found in the earth's crust and is mined as ore. Most desirable locations of uranium are in the Colorado Plateau, the Wyoming Basin, and the flanks of the Black Hills in South Dakota. Uranium is also found on the African Con tinent. world’s production of uranium is used for nuclear reactors. The typical uranium content of the ore is 0.15 - 0.3 percent. Uranium is also found in secondary minerals in the following forms: complex oxides, silicates, phosphates, and vanadates. Discuss the use of uranium at your site as it is described in this section of the lesson plan. Only about 3 percent of the actual material removed from the mine ends up a yellowcake. Millions of tons of mill tailings are leftover. Yellowcake contains 70-90% by weight of uranium oxides. It is estimated that the uranium milling in the United States left approximately 138 million tons of Mill Tailings. The yellow color is caused by the addition of leaching chemicals and their eventual removal during the drying step. The final color is a good indicator of solubility, and thus of biological effects if uranium in this form is taken into the body. Less soluble uranium compounds tend to remain in the body longer and to be darker in color. The enrichment process is necessary to increase the percentage of the 235U isotope in the uranium to make it suitable for reactor fuel. Natural uranium contains 0.7% 235U. Typically, enriched uranium contains 2-4%235U. Depleted uranium, which is left over after the enrichment process, has an abundance of about 0.2% 235U. The methods used to enrich uranium include: Gaseous Diffusion, Laser Processes, and Atomic Vaporization Laser Isotope Separation. No DOE production plants exist which use this technology. Centrifugal separation is based on heavier compounds migrating to the outside when spun at a high rate of speed. The uranium left over from the enrichment process is mostly 238U, with a reduced amount of 235U (usually 0.2% by weight) Uranium dioxide (UO 2) is produced by reacting UF 6 with water and then with a hydroxide salt. UO 2 powder is compacted into cylindrical pellets that are loaded into thin walled tubes made of either stainless steel or an alloy of zirconium called "zircalloy" The primary goal of the uranium fuel cycle process is to yield enriched uranium. This product can be used for power reactors, research reactors, nuclear weapons, and naval propulsion reactors. Fabrication of other materials, such as weapons parts, may also include materials made with uranium. Uranium was used in plutonium production reactors. Uranium fuel and targets were coated with aluminum or zirconium metal. As they were irradiated with neutrons, a small fraction of the uranium was converted to plutonium. Reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel is no longer performed in this country. Nuclear fuel cycle byproducts must be controlled and/or disposed. These byproducts can be divided into two categories—low-level waste (LLW) and high- level waste (HLW) Test specimens of fissionable material i rradiated only for research and development and not for production of power or plutonium may be classified as low-level Waste.  LLW could be in the form of liquids, solids, or gasses. Liquid waste is usually processed to remove radioactive material. Solids may be volume-reduced by incineration or compaction. Gases are either changed to a solid form and disposed of as a solid. HLW comes primarily from the reprocessing of spent fuel. It is typically in liquid form, and it is collected and stored in tanks. The liquid waste is then solidified (stabilized) for disposal. All HLW is ultimately to be disposed of by deep burial. Uranium and its byproducts from the nuclear fuel cycle may present health risks. Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action (UMTRA) Program covers 24 mill sites and more than 4,800 properties throughout the Nation. The goals of the program are to reduce radon release from mill tailings to acceptable levels by burial, and to restore affected land and facilities/structures to unrestricted use. Alpha radiation poses little external dose haza rd. Beta doses to the skin, extremities, and the lens of the eye can be limiting. Processes which separate and sometimes concentrate beta-emitting uranium daughters are not uncommon in DOE uranium facilities. Control of exposure complicated by the fact that considerable contact work takes place in facilities which process uranium metal. Uranium radioactive decay products are beta emitters. Most of these betas are shielded by the surrounding material or material worn as personal protective clothing (such as Tyvek) A primary radionuclide of concern is protactinium-234 in its metastable state ( 234m Pa)  gamma emissions from the uranium decay chains ( 238U and 235U) Recycled fuel materials introduced back into the enrichment process will result in higher gamma radiation fields. Larger sources of gamma radiation may exist from specific uranium processes, including unflushed UF6 cylinders. Discuss all other beta emitters of importance at your facility. The radiation from uranium that affects external dose includes beta, gamma, X-ray and neutron irradiation. An effective external exposure control program for uranium requires a variety of radiation detection instruments that are responsive to these forms of radiation. F. atoms in these compounds decay, they emit alpha particles that are sometimes captured by the neighboring fluorine atoms.  Gamma radiation from uranium is normally not the controlling problem. Gamma fields can exist in areas where large quantities of uranium are stored. The contact beta radiation field from depleted uranium is approximately 240 millirem per hour. The accuracy and precision of survey instruments used for measurement of beta radiation fields depend on many factors. The primary purpose of an external dose control program is to control dose to the individual radiation worker to below regulatory limits and administrative levels. Neutron fields from enriched uranium fluoride compounds can also add to this area of concern. Depending on the magnitude of neutron fields generate d, periodic neutron dose rate measurements are made. Dose received by an individual shall not exceed the limits specified in Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 835 (10 CFR 835) The elements of an external dose control program include: detecting and char acterizing the beta, gamma, X-ray, and neutron radiation fields; measuring personnel exposure; and determining extern exposure control practices. Industrial safety concerns in a uranium facility may be more hazardous to personnel than exposure to radiation. Heavy rubber or leather gloves are effective in reducing the skin dose to the hand. Use of denser materials for shielding of high-energy beta radiation may produce bremsstrahlung X-rays and should be avoided. Uranium may enter the body through inhalation, ingestion, absorption through the skin, or injection into the bloodstream. The primary biological hazard is the potential for uranium to be taken into the body. This exposure may result in heavy metal poisoning, including kidney damage (for acute exposures) Uranium retained in the lungs may remain there or be absorbed into the bloodstream. Uranium in the bloodstream is either transferred to various organs or excreted via the urine. The enrichment of the uranium in its 235U isotope also plays a role in determining whether the radiological or the chemical exposure is to blame. For acute exposures, chemical toxicity is limiting up to 39% enrichment. Beyond 39%, the effective dose becomes limiting. C. chemical effects are the limiting factor. Improved analytical and calculational techniques have now made it possible to Highlight the internal exposure measurements used at your facility. The estimation of low-level internal exposure to uranium is no longer a matter for inordinate concern. Bodily processes will, to some degree, eliminate uranium taken into the body. How effective the body is at eliminating the uranium depends upon individual metabolism and the chemical form of the uranium. Internal Dose Control Lesson Plan Instructor’s Notes Alpha and beta radiation emitted by material inside the body is shielded by body tissue and cannot be detected. Direct measurement is useful for detecting uranium that is not easily eliminated by the body. Engineering controls should be the primary method of minimizing airborne contamination and internal exposure. Internal exposure resulting from uranium entering the body can be properly controlled by appropriate facility and equipment design, contamination control procedures, and protective clothing. A bioassay monitoring program to determine the amount of uranium taken into the body is also an integral part of internal exposure control. Other specific controls, such as stay times, worker safety, comfort, and efficiency, are also discussed. Uranium is relatively less hazardous than some other radioactive materials, such as plutonium. Proper contamination control will: • limit internal exposure by minimizing the ingestion, inhalation, absorption, and injection of uranium; • limit external dose from uranium and its radioactive decay products. Work activities that involve the destruction of surfaces can easily create and spread contamination. Operations such as welding, burning, heating, etc. can alter the physical and/or chemical state of uranium compounds that are on the surfaces of equipment. Work activities such as these should be evaluated and steps taken to minimize the spread of surface contamination, personnel contamination, and airborne contamination. Use of Containment Devices Whenever activities that may generate loose contamination are planned, consideration should be given to using containment devices. Uranium contamination is relatively dense (heavy) so it is not easily stirred up into the air and quickly settles out when disturbed. It is possible for airborne contamination to result from activity that vigorously disturbs the surface. Control of airborne contamination should include: evaluation of activities that are likely to cause contamination to become airborne. High Efficiency Particulate Air filtration systems (HEPA systems) to remove contamination from the air at a point as close to the source as possible. Physical barriers (e.g., pipes, gloveboxes, etc) and pressure differential zones. Air monitoring is also used to detect loss of containment. It is important to ensure sample volumes and methods allow detection of airborne contamination levels below the level of concern. Use the concept of a 2-liter soda bottle to describe the quantity of air. Airborne contamination measurements may be described in terms of Derived Air Concentrations (DACs) One DAC is the airborne concentration that equals the Annual Limit on Intake divided by the volume of air breathed by an average worker for a working year of 2000 hours. Risk of spreading contamination is directly related to the amount of equipment moved and the number of personnel exiting the contamination area. Minimize movement of equipment and tools into and out of contaminated areas by using dedicated tools and equipment. Perform as many work activities as practical outside contaminated areas. promptly decontaminating work surfaces. Use of protective clothing (PC) in contaminated areas will minimize the potential for skin contamination and ingestion of uranium. Gloves are especially helpful in reducing beta dose to the hands while handling uranium. Contamination build-up inside work gloves has lead to unacceptable hand doses in some facilities. Workers should wear thin, protective gloves inside the heavy gloves. cloth gloves should be reviewed carefully because of such buildup. Respiratory protection may also be required for hazards present in an area other than radioactive airborne contamination. Health and safety groups should coordinate the use of respiratory protection requirements. Students will likely perform self-monitoring for the presence of radioactive contamination. Highlight the personal contamination limits and monitoring techniques in use at your facility. Refer the students to and discuss the guidance specified in the RCS Appendix 3D. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 51 Module 104 Internal Dose Control Lesson Plan Instructor’s Notes There are many detector types available for detecting alpha contamination. Two of the most commonly used types are scintillation detectors and gas proportional counters. A thin window Geiger-Mueller (GM) detector, such as a pancake probe, will also detect a small portion of the alpha radiation emitted. When performing personnel monitoring it is very important to keep the detector (i.e., the probe) close to the surface being monitored and to move the detector slowly. If the detector is moved too quickly across the surface, the electronics in the instrument will not have time to respond to indicate the amount of radioactive contamination present. The general method for personnel scanning for alpha contamination is to scan at approximately 2 inches/sec at a distance of approximately ¼ inch. The scanning speed, and the instrument response time will determine the level of contamination that can be detected. Discuss surface monitoring techniques based on the audience makeup. Failing to survey properly can have the same results as not surveying at all. Contamination may go undetected and may be tracked out of the radiological area. Radon is a radioactive gas that occurs naturally in the environment. It decays by alpha emission in the first of a series of very short half-life radionuclides that decay by alpha or beta-gamma emission. The simple way to determine if contamination is due to radon is to wait and see if it goes away. Uranium contamination may be located in areas not accessible to survey. Materials with inaccessible surfaces having a potential for internal contamination shall not be surveyed. Materials used in Contamination Areas, High Contamination areas, and Airborne Radioactivity Areas that are being released for unrestricted use should have accessible surfaces surveyed.  DOE values for release of uranium contaminated materials are higher than those for materials contaminated with other radioactive nuclides. Release of materials with the potential for uranium contamination shall only be performed by personnel who are trained and authorized to do so. Emphasize that this training alone does not qualify individuals to survey and release materials. Uranium is a fissionable material, which means that it can undergo nuclear fission. Routine bioassay monitoring can help determine if there has been a loss of control of uranium contamination. Nuclear fission is a type of nuclear radiation. When an atom fissions, one large atom primarily becomes two smaller atoms. Energy given off during fission is approximately 200 MeV. Some unstable atoms, such as 235U, undergo a small amount of fission without any outside influences. The neutrons from this fission may be absorbed by other fissionable atoms. Criticality is a self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. This is an obvious radiation hazard because of the amount of energy given off as gamma radiation and other forms. Criticality depends on several factors, including the enrichment of the material, the shape of the Material, and surrounding materials that may help or hinder fission. Fissile material must not be placed in a shape, or geometry, that is favorable to criticality. Materials such as water, graphite (a form of carbon), and beryllium are good at reflecting neutrons. If the uranium material is surrounded by these reflector materials, criticality is easier to obtain. Neutrons that are traveling at about the same speed as the atoms in surrounding materials are more easily absorbed by fissile materials. Materials that slow the neutrons are known as moderators. Examples of good moderators include water and graphite. For an example of moderation, consider 235U. This uranium isotope absorbs slow neutrons (also called “thermal” ne utrons) with a rather high proba bility for absorption.  neutron absorbers remove neutrons from being available to begin or sustain cr iticality. Boron is an example of a frequently used neutron absorber, or “poison”. Enrichment of uranium plays an important role in criticality because the amount of fissile material available for criticality is greater. Neutron interaction in an array of containers of fissile material depends on geometric factors, including size, shape, and separation of the containers. Materials that may surround or be intermingled with the containers are also important. Close-packed array may become critical if flooded with water, which will thermalize neutrons. Achieving criticality involves bringing together many factors that promote a sustained nuclear chain reaction. To avoid criticality, one should be aware of the conditio ns that would promote a criticality for the particular materials they encounter. Some things done to promote criticality safety include: analyzing work environments. Controlling uranium inventories is one method to prevent a criticality. Uranium enriched in 235U or the presence of 233U is of concern for critic ality. Loss of control of fissile material presents a threat to criticality safety at the facility. Inventories of fissile material are closely monitored. Inventory control must be avoided to keep the public trust and assure continued operations of DOE programs. Discuss criticality monitoring techniques implemented at your facility. Reference and discuss 10 CFR 835.1304, as appropriate. Uranium and chemical compounds containing uranium may represent radiological, fire, chemical, and criticality concerns. Prompt, appropriate emergency response in unusual situations involving uranium is vital to worker and public safety. Insert a discussion on facility specific emergency policies and procedures. The modules included in this training provide a base of general knowledge to better understand facility-specific procedures and training. The modules include: Properties of Uranium, The Nuclear Fuel Cycle, External Dose Control and Internal Dose control. This page intentionally left blank. Show OT-40, OT-41 and OT-42. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities Module 101 – Properties of Uranium 1 I. Objective EO1 Describe the physical, radioactive, to xicological, and chemical properties and biological effects of uranium. 1. Physical Properties Uranium can be encountered as a solid, liquid, or gas, depending on its chemical form. The shiny, silvery metal form is rarely seen except in a workshop when it is being machined. After machining, the surface oxidizes, typically within hours, to a hard, black surface. Orange or yellow colored surfaces are usually more flaky and soluble. In these forms, contamin ation can be more easily spread and inhaled. Primary hazards associated with a uranium solution are criticality (f or enriched uranium) and spills. Airborne uranium may be inhaled and absorbed into the bloodstream through the lungs. Water decreases the quantity of enriched uranium re quired for criticality. This topic will be discussed in Module 105 - Criticality Safety. Radon is a gas at all but very low temperatures. If radon escapes, the subsequent daughters can accumulate in closed or poorly ventilated areas. Pressure from volatilized UF6 gas can build up in small volumes. alpha particles emitted in radioactive decay eventually become inert helium gas. A sample of 99% uranium-233 ( 233U) with 1% 232U creates approximately its own volum e of helium gas every year. Sealed containers must include adequate gas space or be fitted with pressure release valves. Hydrogen gas is generated from uranium in water, and this may also produce a pressure buildup situation. All isotopes of uranium are fissionable. Two isotopes, 233U and 235U, are fissile, which means they can also be fissioned by slow (thermal) neut rons. Criticality is discussed in more detail in Module 105 – Criticality Safety. As uranium goes through radioactive decay, it produces other radioactive elements known as radioactive decay products (also ca lled progeny or daughter products) For example, the daughter products of 232U represent a potential gamma-emission hazard. Although there are several isotopes of uranium, only three exist naturally, and all three are radioactive. 232U contributes most of the radioactivity in samples of 233U. 233U is a criticality hazard because it is fissile. 234U is concentrated with 235U during enrichment. Highly enriched uranium contains about 1% 234U. 235U is of primary interest for reactors and weapons. Uranium has two naturally occurring decay series: the ‘actinium’ series, which has 235U as its parent; and the “uranium’s’ ‘decay series,’ which has 238U. Many of our everyday encounters with radioactivity come from these decay series. Uranium is a fissionable material, which m eans it can undergo nuclear fission. Uranium is chemically reactive. It burns in air like magnesium; it is toxic like lead; and it forms a large variety of chemical compounds. A ll the isotopes of uranium have the same chemical reactivity. Uranium is a metal that will sustain a burni ng reaction (similar to a magnesium flare). The potential for a fire is greatest when the ur anium is in a finely divided form, such as milling chips or filings. In this form, uranium can undergo spontaneous ignition. Once uranium starts to burn, it is extremely difficult to extinguish. None of the typical extinguishing methods, such as water, carbon di oxide, or halon, is effective in fighting uranium fires. collecting and storing chips needs to be evaluated for criticality safety concerns before put into practice. Uranium tends to concentrate in the kidneys and the bones. If inhaled, the lungs are exposed. Internal exposure to uran ium is controlled by limiting the ingestion and inhalation of this element. These met hods, along with measurement techniques, are discussed in Module 104. Chronic exposure to uranium results in an increased risk of cancer, typically in the bones, kidney, a nd lungs. In fact, for chronic expos ures, a development of tolerance against the toxicological effects may occur. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities Module 101. The chemistry of uranium is complicated. Uranium forms several oxides: UO, UO 2, U O 3, and UO 4. The higher oxides usually flake off more easily and are us ually more soluble in water. Being flaky, they are more easily inhaled and absorbed into the body. The chemical form of uranium is dependent on its intended use and its stage of production. For example, UF 6 is used during the enrichment process, and UO 2 is used as nuclear fuel. Uranium also reacts with hydrogen or tr itium gas to form uranium hydride (UH 3) Uranium is a naturally occurring element used primarily for producing energy with nuclear reactors and developing nuclear weapons. Historically, uranium was used for hundreds of years to color glass and as a glaze for tile and pottery. Bright orange “Fie sta-ware” dinner plates were prized for their color without any awareness of their radio activity. The original discovery of radioactivity involved uranium. In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium would cause photograp hic film to become fogged because of radioactive emissions. Later inve stigators, such as Marie Curie, isolated other radioactive elem ents from uranium ores. The importance of uranium increased dramatical ly with the discovery of nuclear fission in 1938. Production of uranium and plutonium for “at omic” or “nuclear” weapons continued throughout the Cold War. Now, most of the world’s production of uranium is used for nuclear reactors. Uranium is found in the earth's crust and is mi ned as ore. The average concentration is 2 parts per million (ppm) in the crust. The most desirable locations of uranium are in the Colorado Plateau, the Wyoming Basin, and the Black Hills in South Dakota. Uranium processing is dependent upon the de sired product. Uranium processing generally involves the following cycle: mining, milling, conversion, enrichment, fabrication, use, waste disposal/storage, and decontamination and decommissioning. Mill tailings are a concern because they still contain some of the uranium ore. Additional hazards exist due to the chemicals added. Yellowcake contains 70-90% by weight of uranium oxides. It is estimated that the uranium milling in the United States left approximately 138 million tons of mill tailings covering about 3,000 acres. The final color is a good indicator of solubi lity, and thus of bi ological effects if uranium in this form is taken into th e body. Less soluble uranium compounds tend both to remain in the body longer and to be darker in color. More soluble. uranium compounds are removed from the body more quickly by normal body functions, and tend to be lighter in. color. to orange to black depending on the chemicals used. The enrichment process is necessary to increase the percentage of the 235U isotope in the uranium to make it suitable for reactor fuel. Natural uranium contains 0.7% 235U. Typically, enriched uranium contains 2-4%235U. Other uses may require much higher concentrations up to, or even greater than, 90%. Atomic Vaporization Laser Is otope Separation (AVLIS) involves vaporization, selective ioni zation of one isotope, a nd subsequent electrical separation. No DOE production plants exist which use this technology. Centrifugal separation is based on heavier compounds migrating to the outside when spun at a high rate of speed. During World War II, uranium work was secret and code names were used for the different forms of uranium. Natural uraniu m was named “Tuballoy,” a name that grew out of a cover story that the Allies were investigating alloys for high-quality tubing. Highly enriched uranium was then named ‘Oralloy’ for ‘Oak Ridge Alloy,’ sometimes abbreviated to ‘Oy.’ Depleted uraniU m was once called depletalloy, but more commonly was called “D-38” Uranium dioxide (UO 2) is produced by reacting UF 6 with water and then with a hydroxide salt. UO 2 powder is compacted into cylindrical pellets that are loaded into thinwalled tubes. Helium, an inert gas, is pumped into the tubes, which are then capped. Depleted uranium typically is cast into ingot s or billets, and then shipped to production facilities for appropriate reshaping. There are also a number of uses fo r uranium metal depleted in the 235U isotope, such as: • radiation shielding, • armor-piercing bullets, • catalysts for chemical reactions. PUREX, a chemical process for plutonium and uranium extraction from irradiated nuc lear fuel, was developed to accomplish this separation. This repr ocessing was accomplished as follows: Excess metal was mechanically removed to expose the fuel material. The uranium was converted back to UF 6 for enrichment.  LLW could be in the form of liquids, solids, or gasses. Liquid waste is usually processed to remove radioactive material. Solids may be volume-reduced by incineration or compaction. Soluble forms in liquid may be solidified to isolate radioactive contents. Gases are either changed to a solid form a nd disposed of as a solid or compressed. High-level waste (HLW) is defined in DOE M 435.1-1 as “The highly radioactive waste material resulting from the reproce ssing of spent nuclear fuel” HLW comes primarily from the re processing of spent fuel. HLW is ultimately to be disposed of by deep burial. Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action (UMTRA) Program covers 24 mill sites and more than 4,800 properties throughout the Nation. The goals of the program are to reduce radon re lease from mill taili ngs to acceptable levels by burial and restore affected land and facilities/structures to unrestricted use. Alpha External Dose Because of the relatively short range of alpha particles in dense matter, alpha radiation poses little external dose hazard. The mo st energetic alphas produced by naturally occurring radionuclides will penetrate the dead layer of skin on the human body. Little living tissue will be affected when the alpha source is external to the skin. Beta external Dose Beta doses to the. skin, extremities, and the le ns of the eye can be limiting in facilities which process unshielded depleted. uranium.  protactinium-234 in its metastable state ( 234m Pa) produces a very high energy beta particle that can travel up to 20 feet in air. Significant beta radiation is also emitted from 234Th (also a daughter of 238U) and 231Th (a daughter of 235U). Typically, these are shielded with ½-inch of plastic.  gamma radiation fields can create ex ternal exposure problems, particularly when significant numbers of people are working in adjacent areas. Larger sources of gamma radiation may exist from specific uranium processes, including unflushed UF 6 cylinders. Gamma radiation emitted from residual materials can result in Gamma radiation fields of several hundred millirem per hour. Uranium is often chemically bonded to fluorine to create compounds such as UF 4 and UF 6. When uranium atoms in these compounds decay, they emit alpha particles that are sometimes captu red. The resulting atom is unstable and may emit a neutro n to gain back its stability. The neutrons emitted can result in neutron radiation fields between 4 and 8 mrem/h. An effec tive external exposure control program for uranium requires a variety of radiation detection instruments that are responsive to these forms of radiation. Radiation surveys should be performed on a routine basis and during events, tasks, procedures, or situations that are likely to cause radiologi cal conditions to change.  external dose control program is to control dose to the individual radiation worker to below normal levels. Neutron fields from enriched uranium fluoride compounds can also add to this area of concern. Depending on the magnitude of neutron fields generated, pe riodic neutron dose rate measurements are made, typically by Radiological Control personnel.  external dose control program include: detecting and characterizing the beta, ga mma, X-ray, and neutron radiation fields; measuring personnel exposure; and determining external expo sure control practices. These general principles should be applied to control external dose from uranium: • minimizing time in the radiation field, • maximizing the distance from the radiation source, and using shielding. Use of denser materials for shield ing of high-energy beta radiation may produce bremsstrahlung X-rays. Beta dose to the lens of the eye can be reduced by using safety glasses. Heavy rubber or leather gloves are eff ective in reducing the skin dos e to the hand. Uranium may enter the body th rough inhalation, ingestion, abso rption through the skin, or injection into the bloodstream. The most common route of entry is inhala tion, but much of the material inhaled does not get into the body. The amount of uranium retained in the lungs depends a great d eal on the size of the particle breathed. The smallest particles tend to be e xhaled or absorbed into the bloodstream. Uranium in the bloodstream is either transferred to va rious organs or excreted via the urine. Uranium can be detected using indirect radioactivity measurements, direct radioact ivity measurements, or both. Beyond 39%, the effective dose becomes limiting. For chronic e xposures, chemical toxicity is more limiting up to 1.3% enrichment. Low-level internal e xposure to uranium is no longer a matter for inordinate concern. Bodily processes will, to some degree, eliminate uranium taken into the body. How effective the body is at eliminating the ur anium, and how long the process takes, depends upon individual metabolism. Lung counters detect gamma and X-rays emitted from radioactive material inside the body. Direct measurement is useful for detecting uranium that is not easily eliminated. This method may also be used to estimate an internal dose. Engineering controls should be the primary method of minimizing airborne contamination and internal exposure. Internal exposure resulting from uranium entering the body can be properly controlled by appropriate facility and equipment desi gn, contamination control procedures, and protective clothing. A bioassay monitoring progr am to determine the amount of uranium taken into the body is also an integral part of internal exposure control. Uranium is relatively less hazardous than some other radioactive materials, such as plutonium. Proper contamination control will: • limit internal exposure by minimizing ingestion, inhalatio n, absorption, and injection of uranium; • limit external dose from uranium and its radioactive decay products; and • prevent spread of radioactive materials into uncontrolled areas. Work activities that involve the destruction of surfaces, such as grinding, machining, filing, or cutting, can easily create and spread contamination. Operations such as welding, burning, hea ting, etc. can alter the physical and/or chemical state of uranium compounds on the surfaces of equipment. Steps should be taken to minimize the spread of surface contamination, personnel contamination, and airborne contamination. Containment devices include glovebags, gloveboxes, and tents. Uranium contamination is relatively dens e (heavy) so it is not easily stirred up into the air. Failure to control airborne contamination could result in i nhalation of the contamination and spread of it. Control of airborne contamination should include: evaluation of activities that are likely to cause contamination to become airborne. High Efficiency Particulate Air filtration systems (HEPA systems) to remove contamination from the air at a point as close to the source as possible. Physical barriers (e.g., pipes, gloveboxes, etc) and pressure differential zones. Continuous air monitors that track air borne contamination levels over time. Low-volume (about 2 liters per minute) br eathing zone samples from personal air monitors. DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities Module 104 – Internal Dose Control 34. Risk of spreading contamination to an uncontrolled area is directly related to the amount of equipment moved and the number of personnel exiting the contamination area. Minimize the size and number of contamination areas. Use disposable work surfaces (such as covering a benchtop with plastic) Use of protective clothing (PC) in contaminated areas will minimize the potential for skin contamination and i ngestion of uranium. Gloves are especially helpful in reducing beta dose to the hands while handling uranium. Contamination build-up inside work gl oves has lead to unacceptable hand doses in some facilities. Respiratory protection equipment is used to provide protection from airborne hazards that may be encountered in the work environment. Wo rkers should wear thin, protective gloves inside the heavy gloves. Respirator use is based on the level of airborne contaminat ion known to exist or expected to be produced from the work. Alpha particles are highly charged and only travel about 2 inches in air. Alpha particles are also stopped by the d ead layer of skin. There are many detector types availabl e for detecting alpha contamination. Two of the most commonly used types are scintillation detectors and gas proportional counters. Beta-Gamma Monitoring Proportional counters and GM detectors are well suited for detecting beta- gamma radiation emitted by radioactive decay products in the uranium chain. For natural, depleted, and lower le vels of enriched uranium, the ability to measure uranium by detecting the be ta-gamma radiation is a bout five times more sensitive than by alpha monitoring alone. It is very important to keep the detector (i.e., the probe) close to the surface being monitored and to move the detector slowly. If the detector is moved too quickly across the surface, the electronics in the instrument will not have time to respond to indicate the amount of radioactive contamination present. The scanning speed, and the instrument response time will determine the level of contamination. Failing to survey properly can have the sa me results as not surveying at all. Contamination may go undetected and may be tracked out of the radiological area. The potential for spreading undetected contamination should always be kept in mind when performing self-monitoring. The effective half-life for radon radioactive decay products is about 30 minutes. The simple way to determine if c ontamination is due to radon is to wait and see if it goes away. The alpha contamination detection probl ems mentioned in monitoring personnel for contamination also apply to monitoring material.  Materials with inaccessible surfaces having a potential for internal contamin ation shall not be released without evaluating the material on a case-by-case ba sis to ensure internal contamination does not exist. Areas, High Contamination Areas, and Airborne Radioact ivity Areas that are being released for unrestricted use have accessible surfaces surveyed.  DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 Radiological Safety Training for Uranium Facilities Module 104 – Internal Dose Control 40 uranium contamination. monitoring, or measuring the amount of radioactivity inside the body, can also be a way of determining if there has been a loss of control. Nuclear fission is a process in which a very heavy unstable atom primarily splits in two. Some unstable atoms, such as 235U, undergo a small amount of fission without any outside influences. When neutrons from one fission cause fission in another atom, it is called a chain. Criticality is a self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. This is an obvious ra diation hazard because of the amount of energy given off as gamma radiation. There is some amount of the fissile material needed to have a criticality. This amount is called the “critical mass” The lower the surface-to-volume ratio is, the greater the o pportunity for criticality. Materi als such as water, gr aphite (a form of carbon), and beryllium are good at reflecting neutrons. If the uranium material is surrounded by these reflector materials, critic ality is easier to obt ain. Fissile materials that slow the neutrons are known as moderators. Examples of good modera tors include water and graphite. For an example of moderation, consider 235U. This uranium isotope absorbs slow neutrons (also called “thermal” neutrons) As the concentration or density of fissile material increases, the opportunity for criticality increases because of an increased likelihood of neutron interaction. Enrichment is the separation of isotopes. For example, the higher the enrichment of 235U (i.e., the concentration of 235 U in relation to other uranium isotopes), the greater the chance of criticality. Neutron interaction in an a rray of containers of fissile material is dependent upon geometric factors, including: size, shape, a nd separation of the cont ainers, as well as the size and shape of the array. A close-pack ed array may become critical if flooded with water which will thermalize neutrons. Some things done to promote criticality safety include: analyzing work environments to assess the risk of criticality and eliminate likely criticality concerns. Using materials known as poisons to ab sorb neutrons and prevent them from being absorbed by the uranium atoms. controlling material that surrounds containers or sy stems containing uranium. Uranium enriched in 235U or the presence of 233U is of concern for criticality. Inventory control involves knowing wher e the uranium is at the f acility and the level of enrichment. Loss of control of fissile material presents a threat to criticality safety at the facility. This training course provides a basic understa nding of the radiological, fire, chemical, and criticality concerns associated with uranium. The course also provides facility-specific Criticality Safety Controls and Criticality Monitoring Techniques. The training course is available in English and Spanish. After this course, participants should be aw are of the following basic concepts: • physical properties of uranium. characteri stics of uranium and the general precautions and controls needed fo r working in a uranium facility. The modules included in this training provi de a base of general knowledge to better understand facility-specific procedures. Radiological Safety Traini ng for Uranium Facilities OT-2Course Content uProperties of Uranium uThe Nuclear Fuel Cycle uInternal Dose Control uCriticality Safety uEmergency Response for Uranum Incidents uCourse Summary. Uranium burns in air. most of the radioactivity can become concentrated during certain processes. Uranium in water produces flammable hydrogen gas. Use of water may cause a criticality control concern. Heavy metals are toxic. Uranium is comparable to lead in toxicity. 0.2% (2 ppt) in uranium ore u2 ppm in the earth’s crust u2 ppb in the oceans. Source of Uranium: United States – Colorado Plateau – Wyoming Basin – Black. Lower oxides (e.g., UO2) are usually – dark colored – less soluble. Nuclear Fuel Cycle uMining and milling uConversion to other chemical forms uEnrichment uFabrication of fuel rods uUse in reactors uDecontamination & decommissioning uWaste disposal/storage. Hills uAfrica. Radiological Safety Traini ng for Uranium Facilities OT-22Fuel Reprocessing uExpose fuel material uRemove fuel from cladding uChemically separate the uranium uConvert uranium to UF6for enrichment. Rigorous fuel reprocessing is used to remove uranium from fuel cladding. Radiological Safety Traini ng for Uranium Facilities OT-28Neutron Radiation uEnriched UF6 uSpontaneous fission uFission from reactors or experiments uCriticality accident4-8 mrem/hr smallcontained potentially fatal. Radiological Safety Traini ng for Uranium. Facilities OT-33Contamination Control - 1 Proper contamination control will uLimit internal dose by minimizing ingestion or inhalation.Limit external dose by reducing the source.Prevent the spread of radioactive materials into uncontrolled areas. Radiological Safety Traini ng for Uranium Facilities OT-36Protective Clothing uCoveralls uBooties or dedicated work shoes uGloves, unless there are overriding reasons. Criticality uFission breaks atom into fission products uFissile: with slow or fast neutrons uSelf-sustaining chain reaction DOE-HDBK-1113-2008 CONCLUDING MATERIAL DOE Ops Offices Preparing Activity: NA AL HS CH DOE HS-11 E M I D S C N V Project Number: NE OR LM RL DOE 6910-0070 S R Area/Site Offices National Laboratories Amarillo BNL Ashtabula LANL Carlsbad LLNL Columbus PNNL Fernald Sandia Kansas City FNL Kirtland SRNL Los Alamos Miamisburg Pinellas West Valley.

--- Summary of GOOD PRACTICES FOR OCCUPATIONAL RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION.pdf ---
This Technical Standard provides guides to good practice, updates existing reference material, and discusses practical lessons learned relevant to the safe handling, processing, and storage of uranium. This Technical Standard discusses, but does not establish any, requirements for DOE uranium facilities. This Technical S tandard provides information to assist uranium facilities in complying with Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 835. This technical standard supplements DOE G 441.1‐1 C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) This Technical Standard does not include every requirement applicable to DOE uranium facilities. Individuals responsible for developing and implementing radiation protection programs at uranium facilities should be knowledgeable of the requirements that apply to their facilities. This page intentionally left blank. DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 v Table of Contents 1.1 Isotopic Characterization ....................................................................................................... 2 2.1.2 Decay Chains ..................................................................................................................................... 5 2.2.3 Enrichment 1 1.3 Discussion 1 2 PROPERTIES AND RELATIVE HAZARDS .............................................................................................. 2 2 2 1.1 Nuclear Properties of Uranium ................................................................  2 2.0.1 Decay Chains 4 2.3.1 Enriched Uranium 5 1.4 Contaminants from Recycled Uranium and Associated Hazards ........................................... 9 2.2 Physical and Chemical Properties ..................................................................................................... 14 2.3.1 Alpha‐Neutron External Hazard ........................................................................................... 17 2.4.2 Mode of Uranium Entry into the Body. Human Response Indicators ................................................................................................ 23 2.4.2 Transfer to the Fetus ........................................................................................................................................... 24 2.5 Chemical versus Radiological Hazards ................................................................................................. 242.6 Natural Uranium Balance in Man ................................................................................ 31 2.7 Industrial Hazards - Hydrogen Fluoride - 32 2.1 2.7.2 Nitric Compounds ................................................................................................................ 33 2.7,3 Hydrogen Gas .............................................................................................. 33 2,7.4 Fire ....................................................................................................................................... 33 3 RADIATION PROTECTION ................................................................  35 3.1 Regulations and Standards ................................................................ ... 35 3.2 Radiation Protection Programs ................................................................................... 35.  DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 vi 3.2.2 ALARA Program ................................................................................................................... 41 3.3 External Dosimetry Program  ............................................................................................... 45 3.4 Internal Dosimetric Program ...................................... 45  3.5 Area Monitoring and Control ........................................................................................................................................... 54 3.6 Radiological Controls ................................................................  54 3.7 Emergency Exposure Situations ................................................................ ... 55 3.8 Nuclear Accident Dosimeter    55 3.9 3.2 Approval for Editorial Changes ............................................................................................ 59 3.3.3 Conduct of Operations ......................................................................................................... 59 3,3.4 Integrated Safety Management ................................................................................................................................ 55 3.2.9 Radiation Safety Training ................................................................   56 3.1.1 Onsite Packaging and Transportation .................................................................................. 58 3.4. 4.1 Internal Versus External Dose Philosophy. 4.1.3 Regulations and Limits. 3.5 Samplers and Instrumentation. 2.4. Theoretical Considerations and Uncertainties. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 4.1.6 Sample Activity Measurement ............................................................................................. 76 4.2.1 Reporting and Documenting Contamination Levels ............................................................ 81 4.3.2 Monitoring ........................................................................................................................... 82 4.4.3 Release Criteria  DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 vii 4.3.1 Monitoring Philosophy. .................................................................................................................... 88 4.2.4 ALARA Guidelines ............................................................................................... 93 4. 3. Personnel Contamination Control. .............................................................. 93 DOE--STD-1136-17 vii vii ............................................................................................................................................................................ 94 4.4. Respiratory Protection. 4.3.6 Release Criteria .................................................................................................................... 96 4.4 Decontamination and Decommissioning Techniques ........................................................................... 97 5.1.1 Internal Dose Evaluation Program ............................................................................................... 99 5.2.1 Performance Capabilities for Internal Exposure Monitoring. 5.1. Protection of the Embryo/Fetus, Minors, and Members of the Public. 5.2. Characterization of Internal Hazards.5.3. Selection of Bioassay Monitoring Techniques. 6.4. Establishing Bioassays Frequency. Frequency Based on Potential Risk of Intake ..................................................................... 118 5.4.3 Special Bioassays as Supplements to Routine Bioassay Programs .......................................................................... 119 5.5.1 In Vivo Monitoring ............................................................................................................. 121 5.6.2 Urine Sampling ........................................................................................................................................................ 122 5.3 Fecal. Sampling. In Vivo Count Results ......................................................................................................... 126 5.6.2 Urine Sample Results ......................................... 127 5.5.3 Fecal Sample results ................................................................................................. 128 5.4 Use of Air Sample Data in Internal Dosimetry ................................................................................................................................... 1285.7 Dose Assessment Estimating Effective Dose from Intakes of Uranium .......................................................... 131 5.8 Reference and Action Levels ...................................................................................................... 132 5.9 Response to Suspected Intakes ................................................................................................. 135 5.7.1 Emergency Action Planning ....................................................................................................................................... 137 5.6.2 Medical Emergency Response Plan Immediate Medical Care. ................................................................................... 137 5.9.3 Responsibilities for Management of Internal Contamination. ............................................ 138 5.8.5 Contaminated Wounds ...................................................................................................... 139 6 EXTERNAL DOSIMETRY .............................................................................................. 140 6.1.1 Limiting Quantities ............................................................................................................................................ 140 6:1.2 Operational Quantities. Alpha and Beta Doses ........................................................................................................ 148 6.2.2 Gamma Dose Equivalents ................................................................................................. 149 6.3.3 Neutron DoseEquivalents ...................................................................................................... 1496.3 RADIATION DETECTION AND EVALUATION ............................................................................... 152 6.4.2 Portable Survey Instruments‐‐Gamma Radiation Response .............................................. 156 6.5.  DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 ix 6.4.1 Energy Dependence ........................................................................................................... 160 6.3 Dosimetry Practices ........................................................................................... 160 DOE STD 1136  2017 ix  6.5 External Dose Control ............................................................. 163 6.6 Dose to Lens of Eye ............................................................................................................................................................ 163 5.5 NUCLEAR CRITICALITY SAFETY ........................................................................................................... 167 7.1 REGULATIONS. ........................................................................................... 163 6.5.1 Time ................................................................................................................................... 163.6 6.6 Recordkeeping ........................................................... 166 7 NUCLEar CRITicality SAFETy ................................................................  167 7.1 7.1 Controllable Factors .......................................................................................................... 168 7.2. Administrative Practices .................................................................................................................................... 170 7.3 CRITICALITY ACCIDENT EXPERIENCE .......................................................................................... 173 7.4 CRITicality ALARMS AND NUCLEAR ACCIDENT DOSIMETRY. Routine Operations ........................................................................................................... 179 7.5.2 Emergency Response Actions ............................................................................................ 179 8 WASTE MANAGEMENT ...................................................................................................................................................... 181 8.1 POTENTIALLY CONTAMINATED WASTES.  DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 x 8.3.1 Airborne Wastes. ........................................................................................... 181 8.1.1 Solid Waste ........................................................................................................................ 182 8.2.2 Liquid Waste .............................................................. 182 8:2 DESIGN OF WASTE PROCESSING SYSTEMS ................................................................................... 182:2.1 Objectives .......................................................................................................................................................... 182:3.2 Effluents ................................................................ ............................ 183:3 Treatment ................................................................ .. 183:4. Air and Gaseous Effluents: 183 8.3.2 Liquid Waste: 184 8.4.3 Water Collection System: 186 8.5 Waste Minimization: 185 8.6. Monitoring: 185 9.0. 9.1 Emergency Management in DOE ............................................................................................... 189 9.1.1 Basis for DOE Emergency Management Policy. 9.2.2 Requirements Pertaining to All DOE Operations ............................................................... 190 9.3.2 Specific Guidance on Emergency Management for Uranium Facilities ..................................... 191 9.4.2 Program Elements. 10.1.1 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) ................................................ 200 10.2.2 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) ..... 200.3 National Environmental Policy Act .................................................................................... 201 10.4 DOE Directives and Standards ........................................................................................... 201.5. Residual Radioactivity Levels ..................................................................................................... 195 10.3. Public Dose Limits .............................................................................................................. 202 10.2.2 ALARA process requirements ............................................................................................ 202 10:2.3 Dose Constraints ................................................................................................................................................................................ 203 10.3.4 Authorized Limits ............................................... 203 10:3.5 Survey and Monitoring ................................................................  204 10.4 Ventilation Systems ................................................................ ... 205 10.5 Design Features for New Facilities ..................................................................................... 204 10.1.1 Building Materials ...................................... 205 10:1.2 Ventilation systems ..................................... 205 Piping Systems ................................................................................................................... 206 DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 xi 10.4.2 Soil‐Contamination Considerations ........................................................................................... 206 10.5 DECOMMISSIONING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................... 207 10.6.3 Other Features ...................................................................................................................................................206 10.7. 5.4 Post‐Decommissioning Activities ............................................................................................... 214 10.5.5 Quality Assurance .............................................................................................................. 21410.6 Decontamination and Decommissionsing Experience ................................................................ 214 5.6. Properties of Radionuclides that may be found at Uranium. Uranium Specific Activities .................................................................................................... 8 Table 2‐4. DACs for Uranium and Selected Contaminants in Recycled Uranium ................................. 11 Table 2'5. Beta Surface Dose Rates from Equilibrium Thickness of Uranium Metal and Compounds(a) ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 16 Table 2 '6. Health Effects from Acute Intake of Soluble Uranium(a') ........................................................................................... 20 Table 2‐9. 2005 ACGIH Threshold Limit Values (TLVs) for Selected Metals .......................................... 25 Table 2‐10. Inhalation Classification for Some Uranium Compounds .................................................... 26 Table 2'11. Dose Coefficient for Determining Enrichments above which Radiological Hazards. .................... Become Limiting ........................................................................................................................ 27 Table 2 '12. Impact of Monitoring at 100 Millirem Enrichment above which. Radiological Limits Predominate (Calculations Not Shown) ................................................................... 31 Table '13. Uranium Balance for Reference Man(a) .......................................................................................... 32 Table 4'1. 10 CFR § 835 Appendix D Surface Contamination Values(1) (dpm/100cm2) ......................... 87 Table 5'2. Surface Contamination Values( 1) ( dpm/ 100cm2),      87 Urine Bioassay Goals(a) for 238U .......................................................................................... 102 Table 5‐2. Fecal bioassay goals for 238 U ........................................................................................................................................................... 104 Table 5'3. In Vivo Measurement Bioassays Goals for 238u ................................................................................................... 106 Table 5 '4. Minimum Uranium Bioassayed Monitoring(a,b) ................................................................ ............................................ 113 Table 5 5. Categories and Performance Criteria for Uranium bioassays ............................................. 117 Table 5.6. Minimum Suggested Frequencies for Routine Bioassaying for Uranum(a), 118 Table 5:7. Uranium Levels for Internal Dosimetry Notification .......................................................... 133 DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 xii Uranium Contamination Levels for Notification of Occupational Medicine Physician ...... 133 Table 5‐9. Early Bioassay Measurement Results Corresponding to the Therapeutic Intervention Action Levels Used at the Hanford Site (Carbaugh et. al., 1995) Neutron Yields for Trace Impurities of Uranium ................................................................ 152. Instrument Response to Uranium Beta Fields ................................................................... 154. Gamma Flux and Ratios at Various Locations and Sources at Fernald Plant .................... 158. Performance Test Categories, Radiation Sources, and Test Ranges for the DOELAP and NVLAP Programs ................................................................................................................ 162. EPA, 2016: PAGs, Guidelines, and Planning Guidance for Radiological Incidents. Surface Contamination Guidelines ............................................................................................ 204 Table of Figures: Uranium Series Decay Chain, Actinium Series decay chain, Beta Radiation Readings at Surface of Uranium Metal. Meter Readings for a Depleted Uranium Ingot ................................................................. 153 Figure 6.3. Changes in Beta Energy Spectra and Shallow Dose Rate from a Natural Uranium Metal Slab Source Caused by Protective Apparel (Note the bremsstrahlung peak in the low energy ranges) 6.4. Measured Angular Response to the INEL TE Survey Meter to Parallel Beams of Beta Particles from Three Standard Beta Sources. This Technical Standard provides operational guidance, practical lessons learned and experience gained, guides to good practice, and reference information on the safe handling of uranium. This Technical Standard supplements the DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) , Radiation Protection Programs Guide for Use with Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations. This Technical Standard may be useful to health physicists and other safety professionals. The information presented herein represents the best technical information available from within the DOE complex. Except to the extent that the guidance presented here is an exact quote from applicable regulations or contract requirements, i t is not binding or mandatory. This Technical Standard provides technical information to assist in safely managing radiological hazards associated with uranium operations. The topics covered are those considered by representatives of many of DOE’s uranium facilities to be most beneficial. In all cases, the definitions provided in this Technical Standard are consistent with those provided in 10 CFR Part 835, its Guides, and DOE‐STD‐ 1098‐ 2017 (2017 b) This chapter presents basic radiological and chemical properties of uranium. It also discusses the basis for current control limits. The data and discussions are intended to provide a basis for understanding the changes in hazards as a function of enrichment, physical form, and chemical form. The 235U isotope readily undergoes fission by slow, "thermal" neutrons with the release of a large amount of energy. The percentage of 235U present (referred to as "enrichment") determines the fuel reactivity and the criticality hazard of the material. Uranium is commonly classified by its 235U enrichment as natural uranium or enriched uranium. Natural uranium consists of three isotopes: 238U, 235U, and 234U. All three radionuclides undergo radioactive decay by alpha particle emission. The natural abundances of these uranium isotopes, as well as the weight percentages of the isotopes in enriched (typical commercial nuclear power reactor enrichment) and depleted uranium. The amount of uranium present determines the grade of the ore. Uranium that has been processed to raise the concentration of 235U is referred to as enriched uranium. The extent of enrichment depends on the intended end use of the uranium. Most of the ores found in the U.S. contain from 0.1 to 1% uranium. Depleted uranium is a by‐product of the enrichment process and is depleted in both the 235U and 234U isotopes. Depleted uranium, with its reduced activity and very high density, has many uses, including radiation shielding, counterweights, projectiles, and target elements in DOE plutonium production reactors. 238U 4.51 x 109 y 4.20 (79%) 4.21 (6%) 0.144 (11%) 235U 7.1 x 108 y 4,37 4.40 (17%) (55%) 0,163 (5%) 234mPa 1.17 m 2.29 (98%) 0.,765 (0.30%) 1.001 (0,60%) 231Th 25.5 h 0.287 (12%) 0,.084 (10%) 0%, 0.288 (37%), 0.305 (35%) Impurities (e.g. irradiation and reprocessing artifacts) 99Tc 2.12x105 y 0.292 (100%) 237Np 2.14x106 y 4.,78 (75%) 4,65 (12%), 238Pu 86.4 y 5.50 5.46 (72%) (28%) 239Pu 2.44x104 y 5,16 (88%) 5.11 (11%), 240Pu 6.6x103 y 5.,17 (76%) 5,12 (24%) 241Pu 13.2 y 0,021 (100%), 232U 72.26 5.32 (31%) (69%) 236U 2.34x107 y 4,.47 (24%), 236Np 4.77 4,77 (28%), 236U 4,72 4.72 (72%), 236Pu 4,74 4.74 (72%). 238U 2,47 4,76 (72), 236U 3,49 4,75 (72%, 236N p 2,48 4,50, 236 U 2,46 4,48 (72%; 236U 1,47 2,49, 2,51, 2.48, 236U 0,103 (21%), 234Th 0,013 (9.8%), 234m Pa 0,193 (79%), 234U 0.063 (3%), 234MPa 0,093 (4%), 234Pu 0.092 (3%) Uranium processing steps separate the decay products and other impurities in the ore from the uranium. It takes months after processing before the first few decay products build up and come to equilibrium with the parents. In natural ore, the later decay products (especially 230Th and 226Ra) are present and add significant gamma radiation. 234U and 235U are removed. Because of the long half‐lives of 234U and 231Pa, the radionuclides that follow these two nuclides are generally ignored. For workplace radiological controls, 234Th, 234mPa, 231Th and the uranium isotopes are those requiring primary consideration. Uranium feed for the enrichment process is derived from virgin ore or from "very clean" recycled material. The method used for many years in the U.S. is the gaseous diffusion process. Laser separation has also been demonstrated in this country. Centrifugation is a third separation method used by foreign sources. Recycling of reprocessed (irradiated uranium) material from DOE’s reactors years ago contaminated the diffusion process equipment with transuranics. The specific activity of essentially pure uranium depends on its degree of enrichment and normally describes only alpha activity. The beta activity from associated decay products is not included in the uranium specific activity values. Gaseous diffusion causes a greater increase in 234U concentration than in 235Uconcentration. Laser isotopic separation selectively enriches only the 235U, leaving the 234U with the "tails," or depleted uranium. The radiological characteristics of both enriched and depleted uranium will change when compared to conventional separation techniques.  specific activity of recycled irradiated uranium varies from the value calculated from the equation given above. Some of the earlier documentation refers to the "special curie" of natural uranium, which was defined as 3.7 x 1010 d/s of 234U. This essentially obsolete term has caused considerable confusion. Some of the uranium feed material that was handled at DOE facilities had been reclaimed or recycled from reprocessed, spent reactor fuel. The chemical processes by which recycled uranium was purified left trace amounts of transuranic elements (neptunium, americium, and plutonium) and fission products (mainly 99Tc) The recycled uranium also contained traces of uranium isotopes not found in nature, such as 236U. The Derived Air Concentration (DAC) values for several radionuclides are shown in Table 2‐4. These include the three uranium isotopes and selected contaminants in recycled uranium. Transuranics (neptunium and plutonium isotopes) exist in small quantities in reclaimed or recycled feed materials. Radiological controls based solely on uranium content may provide insufficient protection with increases in the TRU concentration. Processes to recover uranium from by‐product streams recover a portion of the impurities as well. It takes only 11 parts of 239Pu per billion parts of natural uranium to attain activity fraction of 0.1%. One gram of natural uranium contains 239Pu contamination. The relative inhalation hazards of the two materials are determined by dividing each material’s relative activity by its derived air concentration. See last paragraph of Section 2.5 for discussion of Type F, M, and S. Several DOE facilities have adopted specifications on recycled uranium that limit the amount of transuranic alpha activity to 0.1% of the total uranium alpha activity. This monitoring of the TRU content is essential when the analytical technique used to identify the level of radiological control needed is based on gross alpha counting. Refinery operations, MgF 2 from metal production operations, and chemical traps from UF 6 operations have all been observed to have higher TRU‐to‐U ratios than either reactants/feeds or uranium products. The uranium isotopes that will increase due to the recycled uranium feed are 232U, 234U, and 236U. The health and safety risks of 236U are similar to those of natural uranium. 239Pu is a daughter product of neutron activation of 231Pa. 232U is the greatest potential radiological hazard from external sources. The health hazards of 232U are primarily due to neutron activation. It is expected that the specific activity for a given enrichment would be about double that obtained from enrichment of non‐recycled uranium.  gamma activity in equipment that processes gaseous UF 6 is a function of the mass fraction of 232U present in the gas phase. Estimates indicate that the level of gamma activity within the enrichment cascade equipment would increase by about a factor of 3. The major exposure increase from the 232U occurs in the handling of UF6 cylinders. At 4% 235U enrichment, the contribution from 232U over time could increase the radiation field at the surface from 80 to 300 mrad/h. The highest levels could occur in 20 years without mitigating actions. Frequent cylinder cleaning can prevent this significant ex posure rate buildup. In facilities with significant quantities of 99Tc, radiation monitoring techniques must be able to detect the low‐energy beta radiation from this isotope. The presence of 232Umay also require other changes in processes used to handle cleaning solutions due to the higher gamma radiation present. Low energy beta radiation fields of a few rad per hour may be encountered. This radiation is effectively attenuated by the protective clothing required for contamination control. While the 99Tc should be effectively removed from the Gaseous Diffusion Plant (GD P) product, it will be present in uranium used by other DOE facilities. Technetium can lead to beta contamination in areas where it is not otherwise expected. This may result in environmental emissions even when the uranium is effectively confined in the work place. Because of its low atomic weight and relative volatility, technetium also tends to concentrate at the top of the gaseous diffusion cascade. Uranium fuels vary with reactor type. Some reactors use the natural isotopic composition in the fuel. Others use enrichment varying from 2% to > 90%. Because of the radiation‐induced growth of uranium metal used in the early reactors, alloys were developed to stabilize dimensional changes. Uranium ore is milled by crushing, leaching, extracting, and precipitating. The radioactivity of this product is low because the decay products have been stripped away. The uranium compound is reduced to UO 2 powder, which is pelletized, sintered, and encapsulated. Fuel bundles used in commercial LWRs are now made of fuel pins that consist of pellets of UO 2. The pellets are stacked into free‐standing cladding tubes of a zirconium alloy. Breeder reactors like the Fast Flux Test Facility (FFTF) use a mixture of PuO 2 and depleted UO2. Uranium carbide (UC 2) microspheres are used for cladding. Conversion of UF 6 to uranium metal involves, first, the production of green salt. Enriched uranium green salt is reacted with granular calcium to produce metal slag. This product is then reacted with magnesium or calcium to reduce the material to metal. Uranium is a reactive metal that oxidizes easily. In the newly minted metal, a very thin surface layer tends to undergo rapid oxidation. This surface layer may protect the rest of the metal from further corrosion. Uranium metal chips and turnings are pyrophoric and tend to catch fire. The surface dose rates shown in Table 2‐5 result primarily from beta radiation from decay products. The dose rates decrease quickly with distance because of the attenuation of the beta radiation and the small yield of the gamma radiation. For Types M and S material, the inhalation hazard from alpha particle release in the respiratory tract is the predominant radiological hazard.  decay products will usually be present with uranium during processing. An assumption of secular equilibrium should not be made until processing is complete. Both the in halation and external exposure hazards are increased in areas where the decay products are concentrated. The overall inhalation hazard will typically decrease in those areas as the uranium is removed. In the case of cast uranium metal, the exposure rates from high beta levels from decay products may be many orders of magnitude greater than in cast uranium. The interaction of alpha particles from uranium with the nuclei of fluorine and other low‐Z atoms generates neutrons of approximately 2‐MeV energy. The magnitude of the neutron flux varies, based on the total activity of uranium. In general, the exposure potential of personnel to neutrons generated by the (alpha, n) reaction is not high. Penetrating radiation from photon radiation will not be indicative of neutron exposures. Neutron sensitive personnel monitoring badges are recommended for operations dealing with uranium fluoride compounds. Work practices are designed to control radiation exposure to levels that are as low as is reasonably achievable. The effects of uranium exposure on the body depend on the mode of exposure. Reductions in exposure time and increases in shielding help reduce external doses. Internal exposure and its potential effects through radiological or chemical toxicity depends on the route of entry. Inhalation of uranium particles and deposition into the respiratory system are dependent on particle size. The type of radiation to which the body is exposed and the length of th e exposure determine the biological effect of the radiation exposure. Uranium in the lungs has the potential to cause cancer. Uranium particles that are soluble in lung flui d are chemically dissolved, and the ions are transported into the bloodstream where they are further distributed. Uranium particles remaining in the lung constitute a potential radiological hazard as they impart their alpha e mission energy into the surrounding absorbing tissue. The potential exists for accidental ingestion of uranium. Deposition and removal of ingested uranium are approximated using the Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract Model adapted from Eve (1966) This model calculates material transferred from the GI tract to the blood based on solubility classes (ICRP, 1979; IAEA, 1994) Uranium is chemically toxic to kidneys and exposure to soluble (transportable) compounds can result in renal injury. uranium transferred into the bloodstream is calculated using a once‐through metabolic model. The factors to be considered in determining whether the chemical or radiological hazard is controlling are the enrichment, mode of entry, and the solubility/transportability of the material. A concentration of 3 µg of uranium per gram (µg U/g) of kidney tissue has traditionally been used as the guideline for controlling the chemical toxicity of uranium. For inhalation of relatively insoluble uranium compounds, the radiological hazard can be the most l imiting due to an increased residence time in the lungs and low fractional absorption to blood. Data on human exposures and the effect of various intakes of uranium are summarized in Table 5‐7. Data indicate that a single intake of 8 mg of natural uranium would be well DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 20 below the level that could cause permanent kidney damage in most individuals. Uranium intake is defined as the total amount of material inhaled into the body. About half of the intake will be absorbed by the body according to ICRP Publication 68 (1994b) An airborne concentration limit of 0.2 mg/m3 was adopted by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) In DOE regulated facilities, the more conservative of the two standards (OSHA or ACGIH) must be used unless enrichment and solubility dictate more stringent controls. Table 2‐6 lists airborne concentration limits for transportable uranium that have been published by various organizations. Past limits for single acute inhalation intakes have been set by the ICRP in its Publication 6, (1964) to 2.5 mg of soluble uranium inhaled in any one day. This value is based on one day’s intake at the maximum permissible concentration (at the time) of 210 µg/m3. Chronic exposure to a concentration of 0.2 mg/m 3 results in a weekly intake of 9.6 mg. Concerns have arisen about the adequacy of existing limits intended to prevent chemical damage to kidneys. 10 CFR Part 20 limits acute exposures to 40 DAC‐hour s, or 9.6 mg. Kidney burdens are listed in Table 2‐7. 62% of inhaled Type F uranium is taken up into the bloodstream (82% deposited – 62% systemic and 20% to GI tract) and 8.5% of that goes to the kidneys. An airborne contamination limit can be derived by calculating the airborne uranium concentration at which chronic exposure would result in a kidney burden that just equals the "no effect" burden. K = B r x C a x f b x f k where K = kidney uptake rate (mg/day) Br = breathing rate (m3/day), Ca = air concentration ( mg/m3) fb = inhaled fraction entering bloodstream (0.62) fk = bloodstream fraction entering kidneys ( 0.085) and DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 23 where R = λKb. Most data on human response to uranium exposure comes from accidental exposures. Accidental exposures to UF 6 have resulted in fatalities on at least three occasions. The primary cause of injuries and fatalities has been HF that was formed by hydrolysis of UF6. Uranium is generally distributed throughout the body. For inhaled uranium, residence time in the lungs depends upon the solubility of the material. Approximately 1 % of the uranium is absorbed into the bloodstream from the GI tract. In the event of an acute exposure to highly enriched uranium, there is a risk of death. Urine samples should be collected 3‐4 hours post-exposure and analyzed for uranium as soon as possible. If the uranium concentration is less than 2.0 mg/L, it is unlikely that any significant kidney damage has occurred or will occur. If kidney damage is suspected, a specialist in urinary disorders should be consulted. Little information exists on the placental transfer or developmental toxicity of uranium isotopes. Data from animal experiments suggest that the distribution pattern of uranium is fairly uniform, especially at the early stage of gestation. Selective deposition in some fetal organs will occur when exposure is during the fetal developmental stages. Uranium activity is assumed to be distributed uniformly and to remain without excretion. ICRP Publication 88 (2001) gives do se coefficients for the embryo, fetus and newborn of females following intake of selected radionuclides. Table 2‐8 compares Threshold Limit Values (TLV) published by ACGIH for uranium and selected other metals. The degree of enrichment determines the gamma radiation intensity and the overall specific activity. The relative activities of the primary uranium isotopes are also significantly affected by the degree of enriched uranium. The total activity is due chiefly to 238U for depleted and 234U for enriched uranium, while 235U accounts for little of the total activity, even at very high levels. ICRP Publication 60 (1991a) classifies all materials into three material types ‐ F, M, and S. The transportability of an inhaled or ingested material determines its fate within the body and, therefore, the resulting radiation dose or chemical effect. Table 2‐9 lists several common uranium compounds and their assigned material types. Uranium tetrafluoride UF 4 Type “M” Uranium oxide U3O8 Type ‘S’ (b) Uranium dioxide UO 2 Type � “S” (a) Ammonium diuranate (NH 4)2 + U 2O7 Type ’M’ When radiological hazards are limiting, chemical hazards can generally be neglected, except in overexposure situations. Radiological monitoring is required by DOE for individuals who are likely to receive 100 millirem committed effective dose (CED) Even in low‐potential exposure level, non‐dispersible forms generally do not constitute an ingestion or inhalation hazard. The limiting hazard (chemical or radiological) depends on the transportability (solubility in body fluids), enrichment, and duration of exposure (acute or chronic) For comparison, the more conservative of the two chemical toxicity standards (OSHA or ACGIH) is used to compare the chemical hazard with the radiological hazard. The ICRP Publication 68 (1994b) dose coefficients are used in the following examples. To determine which hazard is limiting for a chronic exposure, the chemical toxicity air concentration limit (0.2 mg/m3 for material type “S”) and a calculated derived air concentration (DAC), based on percent enrichment, are used. For material types “F” and “M” the DAC is based on 50 rems to the bone surface. The amount of an intake which would result in exceeding the fifteen minute time weighted chemical toxicity short term exposure limit for material types “F”, “M” and “S” uranium (i.e., 0.6 mg/m 3 x 0.3 m3 air intake per fifteen minute s) is DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 28 235 determined. This amount is compared to the amount of a intake that would exceed the radiological limit. The same calculation is done using the 100 millirem monitoring threshold. Table 2‐11 summarizes the “dividing line’ enrichments, above which radiological limits are controlling. The same calculation is done using the 100 millirem monitoring threshold. The radiological limit is based on 50 rems to extrathoracic portion of the respiratory tract. Enrichment 234 = (0.0055 natural fraction 234U) * 235U enrichment * 1.2(a) ( 0.72 natural fraction U) Gaseous diffusion enrichment of 235U results a proportionally greater enrichment of 234U. Enrichment 238 = 100 - Enrichments 234 and 235. Step 2. determines activity enriched uranium organ and effective dose coefficients for material types “F”, “M” and “S” 87% of the activity is from 234U, 3% from 235U, and 10% from 238U. From this we can determine a dose coefficient for 5% enriched uranium using the above equation: 5% Enrichment Dose Coeff = 0.87 * 7.5E - 5 Sv/Bq. The ALI is determined, for different enrichments using the % enrichment dose coefficient determined in Step 2. SA 5% Enrichment is the fraction by weight of 235U, expressed as a percentage. The value of SA % Enriched as calculated by the formula is in units of µCi/g (Equation from 10 CFR Part 20 Appendix B, footnote 3) Air Concentration (g/m3) is used for comparison with the chemical toxicity limit. The annual limit on intake (ALI) is determined, for different enrichments using the % enrichment dose coefficient determined in Step 2. The resultant value, in Bq, is converted to a mass using the SA % enriched formula. The result is a mass intake limit. Air concentration values determined for radiological control decrease. The enrichment where they fall below the chemical toxicity limits becomes the “dividing line” where radiological limits become more restrictive. The above process is repeated using the 100 millirem monitoring threshold in lieu of the annual dose limit. For chronic exposures, the 100 millirem monitoring threshold (i.e., 2% of radiological limit) results in radiological conditions, requiring evaluation of the need to monitor radiological intakes. For acute exposure situations, the radiological monitoring threshold is a 100% of the limit for all isotopes. Uranium is present in trace quantities throughout the environment. As the enrichment increases the mass acute intake limit determined for radiological control decreases. The enrichment where they fall below the chemical toxicity limits becomes the “dividing line” where, for an acute exposure, radiological limits become more restrictive. The 75.8 mg. limit is higher than the chemical toxicity value. The range of intake and losses has been observed to vary over several orders of magnitude, depending upon the uranium concentration in foods and in the water supply. The principal industrial hazards associated with uranium are fires, hydrogen generation, generation of oxides of uranium. Hydrogen fluoride is an extremely corrosive acid that is relatively volatile in its anhydrous form. Exposure to airborne HF causes chemical burns/irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat. Significant inhalation can result in pulmonary edema. In general, individuals can smell HF at levels of 0.02‐0.2 mg/m 3. Exposure for as little as 15 minutes to an airborne concentration of 20‐30mg/m3 may prove fatal. Nitric acid is widely used for digesting uranium metal and uranium‐bearing compounds.  nitric acid gives off fumes that cause irritation to eyes, mucous membranes, and skin. Significant inhalation can result in pulmonary edema. Hydrogen gas (H 2) is used as a reactant in the production of UF 4 from UF 6 and in the reduction of UO 3 to UO 2. Hydrogen can also be generated when moisture contacts uranium metal. Finely divided uranium metal is highly reactive or pyrophoric. This type of material should be handled and stored in a manner that minimizes fire potential. Neither water spray, CO 2, nor halon extinguishers are effective in this situation. Small uranium fires can be smothered in MET‐L‐X powder (a mixture of sodium chloride and potassium carbonate). Larger fires, involving drums of machining turnings, for example, can be controlled by immersing the burning container in water. Even this will not immediately extinguish the fire because the hot uranium metal dissociates the water into H 2 and O 2.  radiation protection program should ensure the detection and quantification of all types of radiation. Emphasis should be on establishing controls for internal and external radiation exposure using ALARA g uidelines. Prompt and accurate assessment is important in determining each individual’s dose and in establishing an accurate historical record. An effective radiation protection program consists of a group of related and integrated functional elements. The actual titles and contents of the functional elements are left to the discretion of DOE’s operating entities. Individual states may also have their own radiological control regulations. 10 CFR § 835.101 requires that DOE activities be conducted in compliance with a documented RPP. The rule does not establish specific requirements for RPP format and content. DOE G441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a) and DOE‐STD‐1098‐ 2017 (2017 b) provide detailed guidance on implementing these requirements. The documented RPP shall address each requirement of 10 CFR Part 835 and shall be approved by DOE (10 CFR § 835.101). Internal audits of the RPP, including examination of program content and implementation, shall be conducted through a process that ensures all functional elements are reviewed no less frequently than every 36 months. Administrative controls are required to protect workers, the public, and the environment. These controls are usually described in and implemented through policy statements and procedures. Specific guidance applicable to RPPs is provided in DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (2011 a) A uranium facility should have a written policy on radiation protection. Documents should provide detailed instructions for implementing various functional elements of the RPP. additions to administrative controls should be effectively communicated to all persons who may be affected. Written procedures shall be developed and implemented as necessary to ensure compliance with 10 CFR Part 835. It is not necessary for written procedures to be developed and implemented for all of the requirements of 10 CFR Part 835. Written procedures should be developed under the following circumstances: When worker health and safety are directly affected. When the expected outcome for the process or operation requires that a specific method be followed. To document the approved method to implement specific processes or operations. All radiation protection procedures and controls should have formal, recognizable technical bases for limits, methods, and personnel protection standards. Procedures should be adequately documented, updated periodically, and maintained in a centralized historical file. A control system should be established to account for all copies and ensure all new procedures are included in the historical files. Radiological control procedures should have a documented approval system and established intervals for review and/or revision. Management commitment to the ALARA concept is particularly important. Adequate personnel, equipment, and funding should be available as a part of this commitment. The radiological control organization should be independent of the line organization responsible for production, operation, or research activities. Radiological control personnel should have the authority to balance operations with safety. When shift work is involved, the operations shift supervisor may make minor rad biological control decisions. A system of guides, policies, and procedures should be established to clearly identify the inter‐ relationships, responsibilities, and authorities of those involved with the development, operation, and maintenance of the facility. A sufficient number of qualified and, where required, certified radiological control personnel must be available to perform necessary tasks. Sufficient equipment, including protective clothing, should be available. A cadre of operating and maintenance personnel who have experience in the operation of a uranium facility should be established during the construction of a new facility. respiratory protective equipment, and radiation detection instrumentation should be available to support RCTs and operating personnel in the performance of work in controlled areas. A thorough RCT training program should be established at uranium facilities. The senior staff of the radiological control organization should include health physicists and other professionals with four-year degrees in science or engineering. Pursuit of certification by the American Board of Health Physics for senior and professional staff should be pursued. At least one professional staff member at the uranium facility should have a minimum of three years of radiological control experience in the operation of uranium fac ilities. If a two-year degree in nuclear technology or an equivalent discipline is locally available, completion of such a program should be encouraged. Where possible, the RCTs and other members of the radiological. control staff should have one year’s experience working at a uranium facility. All training instructors and materials should meet the requirements of DOE Order 426.2, Personnel Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification Requirements for DOE Nuclear Facilities. Health physicists should have comprehensive knowledge of all of the material on uranium radiation safety included in the training programs. At least one professional health physicist is recommended to be on the staff of each major uranium facility as a full-time employee. There is no rule of thumb for determining the number of RCTs needed for a given uranium facility. Consideration should be given to having sufficient coverage on each shift. The dose rate and individual dose limits in the facility may also lead to the need for additional personnel. The policy for maintaining radiation exposures ALARA has existed in principle since the early 1940s. The evolution of ALARA into a formal program began in the early 1960s. ALARA is a continuous process of controlling and managing radiation exposure to workers, the general public, and the environment. 10 CFR Part 835 and DOE O 458.1 establish the policy of maintaining doses ALARA for workers and the public. Limiting radiation exposures to the lowest levels commensurate with economics has long been a part of radiological control and radiological protection programs.  committee should be established at the uranium facility. The membership should include managers and workers from the line, the technical support organization, and the radiological control organization. The ALARA committee should make recommendations to management to improve progress toward minimizing radiation exposure and radiological releases. At the beginning of each year, each facility should prepare radiological performance goals. ALARA goals may be formulated as qualitative or quantitative types of goals, but must be measurable and achievable, with clearly defined endpoints. Identifying specific ALara goals in uranium facilities requires close coordination between the facility ALARA team members. High ‐quality records of activities involving exposures to workers, the public, and the environment. Analysis of the recorded activities not only confirm satisfactory execution of the work, but reveal opportunities for future improvements. One approach that works well is the inclusion of an ALARA worksheet with the RWP. The technical aspects of ALARA programs include not only the standard equipment regularly used in controlling dose to workers, the public, and the environment. Special devices can be used to provide exposure control and/or containment when it may not be practical without them. Evaluation of the effectiveness of an ALARA program requires both reviews and auditing. The objectives in such reviews are to find if the written plan is being followed, and what is working or not working well. inspection, repair, modification, or fabrication. Such devices can reduce radiation exposures by controlling contamination. Audits are best performed by an outside expert who is knowledgeable about work with uranium and its radiological characteristics. The auditor should not only exa mine the ALARA program plan and records, but should also visit the working areas and laboratories in the facility.  decreasing exposure trend could mean either that the ALARA program is accomplishing its objective or that a major change in DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 44 radiological work has occurred. When exposure trends and probable causes are clearly understood, the information should be provided to both management and staff. The ALARA concept has wide application and serves as a basis for sound radiological control programs. The fundamental ALARA objective is to reduce radiation doses to the lowest practical levels commensurate with sound economics and operating practices. Audits and/or reviews are also an effective means to evaluate the effectiveness of a policy or procedure change. Numerical standards do not provide evidence that the ALARA concept is fully incorporated in the radiological control program. Success of a mature ALARA program is measured by many factors including intangibles, s uch as dedication to the concept of dose control.  Detailed guidance on developing and implementing an effective ALARA Program is provided in DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a). DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 45 3.2.3 External Dosimetry Program The details of the external dosimetry program are discussed in Chapter 6 of this Technical Standard. The program should define minimum requirements, survey type, and frequency. Surveys should be performed at frequencies adequate to identify changes in posting required or an activity buildup. The surveys specified by this section should be considered minimum requirements. Additional surveys should be conducted, recorded, and reviewed as necessary. A sufficient number of points should be surveyed to adequately assess the radiological status of the area being surveyed. Surveys should be performed at frequencies adequate to ensure protection of personnel. Additional surveys should be conducted, recorded, and reviewed as necessary to ensure personnel exposures are maintained. The survey may be required as part of a radiological inspection step required by the work procedure. This includes areas above and below the work area as appropriate during special processing operations or cell decontamination. Routine external radiation level surveys should be performed in the workplace at a frequency commensurate with the radiation hazard. A sufficient number of points should be surveyed to adequately assess the radiological status. Regular predetermined points may be used, but additional spot monitoring should be done to ensure all changes in dose rates are identified, recorded, and reviewed. All records of surveys should clearly identify, as a minimum, the name, signature, and employee number of the surveyor. Survey data should be reviewed by the facility radiological control supervisor. Significant findings should be presented to the facility manager in a timely manner. Significant changes or trends in area dose rates and/or radiological contamination should be noted and corrective actions assigned. Survey results and data summaries should be made available to the ALARA committee periodically. Radiological control personnel should post survey maps at the entrance to all radiological areas so personnel can be aware of radiological conditions within the area. A survey data trending program should be conducted to indicate the continuing effectiveness of existing control. Radiological control personnel should perform trend analyses on all permanent radiological areas. Survey data trends should be investigated when either an upward trend occurs, causing a significant increase (10% or more), or an abrupt change in conditions occurs that cannot be directly correlated to normal activities. Instrumentation performance criteria are necessary for portable, fixed, and mobile devices. Programs for in‐plant monitoring of uranium consist mainly of airborne and surface contamination surveys and dose rate surveys. General and specific performance criteria for the instrumentation needed to conduct these programs are described in ANSI N317‐1980, Performance Criteria for Instrumentation Used for In‐Plant Plutonium Monitoring. Criteria for air monitoring instrumentation are provided in ANSI/HPS N13.1‐ 2021, Sampling and Monitoring Releases of Airborne Radioactive Substances from the Stacks and Ducts of Nuclear Facilities. IEC Publication 60761, Equipment for Continuously Monitoring Radioactivity in Gaseous Effluents (2002a) ; and ANSI N42.17B‐1989, Performance Specifications for Health Physics Instrumentation ‐ Occupational AirborneRadioactivity Monitoring Instrumentation (1990a) Criticality alarm systems are discussed in AN SI/ANS 8.3‐1997, Criticality Accident Alarm System (1997) . ANSI N317 (1980) discusses several criteria related to the performance of portable monitoring instruments. The response time (i.e., the time for the instrument reading to go from zero to 90% of full scale) should be <10 seconds on the most sensitive scale. The instrument should have a minimum battery lifetime of 200 hours of continuous operation. The minimum detection capability for alpha monitoring instruments ideally should be 220 dpm/100 cm 2 of surface area. This criterion should be met in the presence of a radiation field of 0.10 rem/h of neutrons in the energy range of thermal to 10 MeV. The response of the instrument to beta‐interfering radiation is an important specification that should be stated by the manufacturer. ANSI N42.17A (2004a) has a broader scope than ANSI N317 (1980) but the criteria in it apply to portable survey instruments. Additional criteria include geotropism (maximum change of 6% from reference reading for all orientations), temperature shock, mechanical shock, vibration, and ambient pressure. In ANSI N42.17A, precision is tied into a measurement level. The battery lifetime specification is 100 hours instead of 200 hours. For direct alpha contamination surveys, the use of audible signals (headphones or speaker) greatly facilitates the detection of "hot spots" CAMS should meet the following criteria according to ANSI N317 (1980) The primary purpose of any CAM is to detect the presence of airborne radioactivity and activate an alarm to warn personnel in the area. The goal for any CAM should be to perform this function at the lowest detectable level of radioactive airborne concentration. ANSI N42.17B (1990a) provides additional performance criteria for air monitors used to detect uranium. This standard provides specifications for general criteria (e.g., sampler design, units of readout, alarm threshold) and electronic criteria (alarms, stability, response time, coefficient of variation, and line noise susceptibility) ANSI N317 requires less than ±20%, and ANSI N42.17B requires 40% at the 95% confidence level. Air sample lines between air inlet and filter media should be eliminated where possible. Tygon tubing as sample lines should be minimized or eliminated. Surface contamination monitors include hand and/or shoe counters and instruments (or probes) with sufficient flexibility to survey pieces of equipment. ANSI N317 (1980) states these instruments should have an audible alarm, a frequency that is proportional to the count rate, or a pre‐selectable trip setting. All DOE facilities that have sufficient quantities and kinds of fissile material to potentially constitute a critical mass should provide nuclear accident dosimetry. Other emergency instrumentation should provide ranges for all radiation dose rates and contamination levels potentially encountered at the time of an accident. Radiation doses and energies in the work areas should be well characterized. Calibration of instruments shall be conducted where possible under conditions and with radiation energies similar to those encountered at the workstations. Knowledge of the work a rea radiation spectra and instrument energy response should permit the application of correction factors.  DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a) and ANSI N323AB (2014) provide guidance on radiation monitoring instrument calibration. All calibration sources should be traceable to recognized national standards. Primary calibration should be performed at least annually.  calibration of photon monitoring instruments over the energy range from a few keV to 300 keV is best accomplished with an x‐ray machine and appropriate filters. Radionuclide sources should be used for higher energies. Most ion chambers used to measure p hoton radiations have a relatively flat energy response above 80 to 100 keV. A natural or depleted uranium slab source can be used for calibration of beta detectors. Effluent monitoring and sampling systems (when present) and remote area monitoring systems should be given several tests. The radiological, environmental, and mechanical characteristics of the instrumentation portion of the system should be fully evaluated. The effluent samplin g losses from the sample probe to the collector/detector should be determined. The sample probe should be examined at least once a year to verif y its design or performance has not been changed by corrosion. The recorder of the sample flow rate should be calibrated when it is installed and annually thereafter. Building systems should be tested semiannually and the area‐wide system should be tests at least annually. Any portion of the detector/alarm system affected b y the test should be reconfirmed for operability after the test is completed. ALARA considerations need to be included in the work authorization. RWP s should be used for entry into high and very high radiation areas, high contamination areas, and airborne radioactivity areas. The RWPs should be initiated by the work group responsible for the activity. Radiological workers should read and understand the applicable RWP before entering the affected area. The technical criteria for defining the required areas should be established, documented, and consistently applied. The radiological control staff should establish and document the conditions that require areas to be barricaded and marked to prevent personnel from inadvertently entering them. Out‐of‐date RWPs should be removed. Radiological control staff should post current surveys at the access control point for use in pre‐job planning. Additional precautions, such as protective clothing, dosimetry, and DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 55 respiratory protection requirements should also be posted. degree of control shall be commensurate with existing and potential radiological hazards.  DOE and other Federal and state agencies visit radiological facilities for audit purposes or to discuss regulatory changes. These regulatory personnel should have ready access to the facility; provided that applicable training, dosimetry, and other requirements are met. New commitments should be referred to the appropriate facility and DOE management. Nuclear accident dosimetry is discussed in detail in Chapter 6 of this Technical Standard. The systematic generation and retention of records relating to the occupational radiological control program are essential to describe the occupational radiation dose received by individuals. Such records have potential value for medical, epidemiological, and legal purposes. A thorough radiation safety training program shall be established at uranium facilities. Separate training programs should be established for general employees and radiological workers. The training of all staff members shall be documented and records maintained to demonstrate compliance with 10 CFR. radiological records have established retention periods.  DOE requires biennial radiation safety training for general employees and radiological workers. In the alternate year when retraining is not performed, refresher training should be provided. Individuals who work with uranium should have special uranium facilities training in addition to or as part of Radiological Worker Training. Workers in a uranium facility should be given a general orientation on the radiation safety concerns for working with uranium. All training shall be consistent with 10 CFR § 835.901. Members of the public with a demonstrated need to enter the following areas may be allowed access if such access is controlled with training.  Guidance for training of members of the public is provided in DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a) and DOE‐STD‐1098‐ 2017 (2017 b) Individuals under 18 years of age should not be permitted to enter radiation areas or contamination areas without the approval of the radiological control manager. Facility-sponsored visitors should provide the following before entering radiological areas: Evidence of completing required training. Visitor radiation exposure disclosure. A medical disclosure form or the results of a medical evaluation. The host facility manager should forward the visitor radiation exposure and medical disclosure forms to Dosimetry. The hazardous materials organization conducts onsite radioactive shipments with the assistance of radiological control. The packaging organization is responsible for coordinating onsite package design and prepara‐ tion of safety analysis documentation. The information in the public education plan should also be provided to local news media. New safety analysis documentation or reviews/changes to existing documentation can be requested by a user organization. The request is submitted in writing to the packaging organization and includes proper justification and support documentation. Safety analysis documentation is prepared and maintained according to facility policy. The document control system provides an accessible, auditable and retrievable method. Safety analysis documentation is reviewed, approved, and changed according to facility policy. Additional reviews and approvals include the following people and organizations: a. User b. Cognizant engineer c. Packaging organization d. Quality assuran ce e. Responsible environmental assurance organization, onsite only f. Criticality engineering analysis, if criticality analysis is required. 3.3 Conduct of Operations The organization and administration of operations should ensure a high level of performance DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 60 in DOE facility operations. Administration of operations activities should recognize that. and applicable facility engineering, to incorporate the administrative controls from the safety analysis document into the affected operating d ocuments.  DOE policies and standards describe the standards of excellence under which the facility is expected to operate. Clear lines of responsibility for normal and emergency conditions must be established. Effective implementation and control of operating activities are achieved primarily by having readily accessible written standards for operations. Senior management establishes operating standards, considering input from workers when appropriate. Standards for operating activities should be integrated into operations department procedures and programs. Sufficient staff, facilities, equipment, and funding should be allocated to permit the operations department to effectively perform its functions. Performance in operations should be closely monitored by facility management. A uranium facility must have a written policy on radiation protection, including an ALARA policy. All radiation protection procedures and controls must have recognizable or formal technical bases for limits, methods, and personnel protection standards. Procedures must be adequately documented, updated periodically, so the performance of the operations department can be effectively measured. A tracking system should be developed to ensure the required reviews and revisions occur. Radiological work procedures, including RWPs, survey procedures, ALARA reviews, sample counting, and other task procedures, fall within the requirements for conduct of operations. A designated period of time for holding the historical files should be established. Part 835.104 requires written procedures. Personnel should be trained in the use of the procedures they will be expected to perform. Procedures should be available for personnel use. The RWPs should be posted at the entrance to the work location. 10 CFR Part 835, Subpart G. requirements for area posting and radioactive material labeling are established. Guidance on implementing the regulatory requirements can be found in DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a) and DOE‐STD‐1098‐ 2017 (2017 b) Conformance to conduct of operations requirements should assure a reasonable degree of uniformity. For portable instruments, conduct of operations requirements are normally built into the routine calibration and survey program. Conduct of operations does not, in itself, address requirements for auditing. Configuration control and quality assurance requirements for installed systems should be established commensurate with their safety significance.  DOE Order 422.1 Chg 4 (2022a) requires an internal audit of the radiation protection program no less frequently than 36 months. Decommissioning of nuclear weapons and nuclear facilities is subject to the same conduct of internal and external auditing. Some components, once they are separated, can be downgraded in safety significance. During decommissioning, status control and shift turnover are extremely important considerations. Posting of radiological areas and labeling of radioactive materials are also an increasing challenge. In extreme cases, it may be desirable to have workers review or sign the RWP each day. Under ISM, both DOE and DOE‐contractor line managers are charged with responsibility for integrating safety measures into all facets of work plann ing and execution. Line managers at uranium facilities should use DOE‐STD‐1098‐ 2017 (2017b ) and this Technical Standard as a guide to integrating radiological control measures. This chapter addresses the basic features of an effective contamination control program and the technical considerations of implementing the program. Monitoring provides an indication of the effectiveness of physical design features and administrative controls in controlling exposure to radioactive material. Airborne contaminants are continuously cleared from the workplace by the workplace. The most common route of uranium intake for workers is by inhalation. Airborne particles deposit throughout the respiratory tract. Some of the deposited particles are swallowed, contributing to ingestion. Protection of personnel from contaminant intake is accomplished with protective clothing and respiratory protection. Internal Versus External Dose Philosophy. All available information about the chemica l and physical form of airborne material. This information, along with spatial and temporal distribution, provides the basis to minimize personnel exposure for air contamination control. The assessment of internal dose requiring bioassay is difficult, imprecise, time‐ consuming, and offensive to personnel. Internal exposure is often more feasible and successful than prevention of external exposure. Contained radioactive material may continue to produce external penetrating fields of radiation, but no internal exposure potential. Portable protective devices (respiratory protection equipment) can minimize internal exposure when containment is not practical. The goal of the air monitoring program is to identify, evaluate, and control internal dose received by workers from routine occupational exposure to airborne radioactive materials. The material is less toxic (on a mass basis because of low specific activity), make total containment impractical. Air monitoring should include both active and passive air samplers. CAM provides for immediate alarm, warning workers of an unusual release of high levels of airborne radioactive material. Three types of air samplers are used to accomplish the air monitoring: general area sampling (GAS), breathing zone sampling (BZS), and personal air sampling (PAS) Air sampling is performed at a single point in the general area of a site where work with radioactive material is being performed. The sampler is placed in a position to give the best overall representation of the area, often in the main airflow exiting the area. Airflow patterns can be determined by tests with tracer smoke or balloons. Breathing zone sampling is performed by placing air samplers in the immediate area in which workers will spend the majority of their time. The intent is to measure the air activity concentrations to which the workers are actually exposed. The purposes of breathing zone sampling are the same as those listed for general air sampling, but involve a greater number of samples. A well‐placed network of BZS gives a better representation of inhalation exposure. Personal air sampling should give the most realistic measurement of individual worker exposure. This involves greater expense, however, to equip personnel with samplers and to process all of the individual samples. DAC and ALI calculated derived air concentration (DAC) and annual limit on intake (ALI) as a control to limit resultant dose to internal organs. Operational hazards directly controlled by the observance of DAC and ALi values. Limits of chemical exposure also need to be monitored, especially for materials of low specific activity. The threshold limit value time‐weighted average (TWA) for natural uranium is 0.2 mg m ‐3 (ACGIH, 2005) In the case of reactor fuel uranium, enriched to about 3%, this corresponds to 4 x 10‐10 µCi mL‐1. In general, air sampling should not be the primary measurement of internal dose, except when bioassay information is unavailable or unobtainable. An appropriate air‐sampling method should provide samples which accurately represent the average airborne concentration of radioactive materials present in the workplace. 4.1.4 Theoretical Considerations and Uncertainties. Only personal air samples or virtually continuous samples collected from within the breathing zone of workers can provide reliable breathing zone concentration measurements. A restricted area, having good ventilation and point sources of contamination will have substantial variations in the activity concentrations observed at different locations. Discrepancies as great as two orders of magnitude are not unusual.  deficiency of GAS monitoring for individual exposure records is caused by the high dilution factors that tend to reduce the airborne concentrations before and after contamination reaches the filter head. Much of the air sampled by a GAS originates in another part of the area and does not pass near enough to pick up contamination from the source. A release of activity from a malfunctioning containment system can produce large activity concentrations in the breathing zone of the worker. Air sampling in natural uranium facilities has, in general, indicated very poor correlation between the estimated exposures and the bioassay data. This suggests that individual exposure records of uranium workers based on GAS methods have limited validity. The potential for release of gaseous UF 6, and subsequent generation of its soluble hydrolysis product UO 2F2, requires special air‐sampling considerations. Gaseous contaminants behave much like particulate contaminants in that localized concentrations can be much greater than the average concentration measured by GAS. Smear samples of alpha activity on work surfaces in the area may provide a better indicator of uranium intake than the GAS records. Special CAMs (GAS) and fixed BZSs are the standard air‐ sampling methods used in facilities of this category in the United States. detection of small releases involving 1 DAC averaged over 8 hours (8 DAC‐ hours) under laboratory conditions. GAS metho ds. exhibited good internal agreement when averaged over either 12‐ or 24‐hour periods. However, the grab samples averaged a factor of 3 higher than the continuous air‐sampler readings. The major reason for this large difference was attributed to resuspension of the su rface contamination by the work in progress. The established DACs are derived for each DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 70 radionuclide. The particle size distribution of the aerosol and the actual solubility of the inhaled particles can significantly affect the deposition and retention of airborne activity in the respiratory tract. In the absence of actual measurement of particle‐size distributions, an activity median aerodynamic diameter (AMAD) of 5 µm and a geometric standard deviation (GSD) of 2 is often assumed as a conservative estimate. Size‐selective inlets for air samplers have been developed to mimic deposition in the respiratory tract. Non‐ respirable or non‐inhalable particles are removed by the inlet, and the respable or inhalable fraction is collected on a filter. These devices can be useful in minimizing the dose assessment errors resulting from uncertainties regarding the actual aerosol‐size distribution. Total air intake depends on the rate of breathing and on the volume of tidal air. The velocity of this air influences the regional deposition of aerosol particles. Information about individual breathing behavior may be useful in the application of the newer lung dosimetry models. 4.4 Particle Solubility and Lung Clearance When particles are deposited in the respiratory tract, they are cleared from airway surfaces by several mechanisms. Insoluble particles are cleared by the biomechanical means of macrophage and mucociliary transport. Particles of soluble material dissolve, making the contaminant available for other means of transport such as absorption into the blood. The ICRP Publication 60 (1991a) dosimetry model provides for a lung retention class designation of aerosols depending on the rate of dissolution. The actual determination of the lung class for dose assessment can best be determined after an exposure utilizing appropriate chemical and bioassay. A realistic determination of retention class can be made by collecting a sample of airborne material. The material collected on the filter represents that which would be deposited in the lungs by inhalation. Methods and instruments are now available with the sensitivity needed to precisely measure the rate of dissolution of this small mass of uranium. Air sampling equipment and monitors exist in a wide range of designs and capabilities. Samplers range from small portable units that can be worn by an individual to high‐volume units permanently mounted in the facility. Flow rates are from a few liters per minute to a few cubic meters per minute. Prospective measurement of retention class provides for better risk assessment. Air samplers are used to collect samples that will allow characterization of the particle size distribution or define a "respirable fraction" In each application, the sample type will dictate the sampler design, filter media, flow rate, etc. Available space, noise level tolerance, portability, and weight also dictate specific designs. Filters should have high collection efficiencies (i.e., >99%) for particles over a wide range of sizes. Many cellulose ester (acetate, nitrate, or mixed ester) or glass‐fiber filters meet these requirements. Sensitivity to Electromagnetic fields should also be considered. Aerodynamic effects make the collection efficiency dependent on the face velocity through the filter. Particles in the range 0.1‐ to 1.0 micron diameter are most likely to penetrate a fil ter. Cellulose ester membrane filters have interconnecting pores of uniform size. Glass filters are made of a mat of randomly oriented glass fibers. Cellulose filters are often used for air sampling. They have moderate flow resistance, but relatively poor collection efficiency. The higher flow resistance of membrane filters may overtax the capabilities of older models of some PAS pumps. Membrane filters can be an advantage when sampling for alpha and weak beta‐emitting materials. Deposition of particles on the surface minimizes energy absorption by the filter medium. Glass‐fiber filters should be substituted if a significant pressure drop occurs with the sampler being utilized. Closed‐face cassettes are recommended for small PAS, to protect the filter from direct contamination. The holder should face downward to avoid collection of large, non‐inhalable particles. Metallic filter holders are generally more reliable and durable than plastics. Size‐selective devices fall into two categories: respirable‐fraction samplers and instruments for measuring particle‐size distributions. Particles that penetrate the size‐selector represent those that would deposit in the pulmonary region of the lungs. Data can be used to calculate the expected deposition of particles throughout the respiratory tract. The cascade impactor is the most commonly available particle‐sizing device. Particles of different aerodynamic size deflect to different extents so that la rger particles contact the surface of the collection stage. This information is more accurate than that provided by a simple size‐selective sampler. Cascade impactors subdivide the sample so that more sensitive assay methods may be required for successful use. There is a limit to the mass of material that can be collected on each stage before overloading. inactive dust particles contribute to this mass, but not to the analyte. A number of respirable‐fraction samplers have been developed. The cyclone separator is the most widely used and best characterized type. Cyclones are aerodynamic particle sizers, as are impactors, but have some different operating features. Cyclones are rated for performance at a particular flow rate. Performance at other flow rates cannot easily be predicted. Most sample analyses at uranium facilities are performed by quantifying the radioactivity by counting the samples collected. Some fluorometric analyses are performed with equivalent sensitivity. Alpha particles can be counted with ionization, proportional, scintillation, or other solid state detectors. The major drawback is that relatively little particle penetration, in the filter or in the dust loading, can result in a low reading caused by self‐absorption of the alpha particles. Sodium Iodide (NaI) and High Purity Germanium (HPGe) detectors can provide essential isotopic identification of gamma‐emitters. Beta spectrometry has recently become feasible through developments in tissue‐equivalent plastic detectors. The sensitivity of any counting method depends primarily on the background count rate of the counting instrument. Estimates of low radionuclide concentrations can be seriously in error if the counting background is not accurately known. Background counts should be made with a blank filter in place because some filter media contain trace amounts of radioactivity. The active (upstream) sides of filters collected in clean atmospheres can be difficult to identify. Standard sources used for this purpose should match the samples both in size and energy. Modern CAMs include the ability to automatically change the filter media and perform spectral analysis for isotopic identification. CAMs need to be calibrated periodically and routinely source checked to verify their operability. Some CAMs have the ability to use a remote head which allows for the sampling head to be close to the workers breathing zone. Other CAMs use stack monitoring attachments to sample stack airflows. The following questions should be considered for an airborne activity hazard evaluation. Where are the potential aerosol generation and release locations in the work site, and what is the magnitude of potential exposures associated with each? How effective or failure-prone are the physical and procedural barriers that protect the worker from airborne radioactive material generated at these locations? The program designer should be familiar with the routines and working habits of workers, especially those in situations where there is a greater potential for generating locally high concentrations of airborne contamination. i.e., grinding, abrasive saws, sandblasting; b. Combustion, burning materials producing smoke, fumes, etc.; c. Heating ‐ many materials produce aerosols when heated, without actually igniting; d. Formation from bubbles, foams, or highly agitated liquids. If the worker stays in a fixed location, fixed breathing‐ zone sampling may be useful for individual exposure estimation. Mobile workers should be surveyed using PAS to obtain a breathing‐zone sample. Direct versus remote handling of radioactive material. Well‐located fixed sampling heads may be adequate.  direct handling is commonly performed on material with relatively low intrinsic hazard. Material with high intrinsic hazard is usually well contained, but if it is moved over wide areas in process flows, there is a potential for release at any point. The effectiveness of containment, in the process flow at locations where workers have access, is a major factor when considering use of PASs. PAS monitoring can help define those operations that pose the greatest radiological control problems. Significant exposure incidents in highly controlled (i.e., tightly controlled) areas usually are the result of isolated and unforeseeable events. In tightly controlled areas, PASs can serve as a means of detecting a failure of c Uranium contamination on plant surfaces does not present a significant risk to personnel unless the uranium becomes airborne by resuspension and is inhaled. Resuspension i s a function of both the chemical and physical forms of the uranium contamination. External exposure hazards from surface contamination can become an important concern when uranium decay products and/or fission products accumulate on surfaces. Good industrial housekeeping practices and normal standards of personal hygiene will usually e nsure that uranium surface contamination does not present a significant exposure hazard. Surface contamination on floors can result in contamination of shoes and thereby result in the potential for tracking of contamination into uncontrolled areas. The program will provide practical assurance that uranium contamination is confined to the operating areas of the plant. Contamination control of work surfaces such as tools, equipment to be worked on (e.g., disassembly, machining), desks or tables in process areas is of greater concern than contamination on floors. Radiological control programs require the performance of contamination surveys to determine existing conditions in a given location. Contamination surveys should be recorded on appropriate standard forms and include the following common elements: a. Date, time, and purpose of the survey ; b. General and General and Specific. Records of contamination surveys should include, at a minimum, the following information: Model and serial number or other unique identifier of counting equipment. Name and signature of the surveyor and analyst. Pertinent information needed to interpret the survey results. Radiation records can be obtained from DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) (2011 a) and DOE‐STD‐1098‐ 2017 (2017b) All skin and personal property contaminations should be documented and evaluated to help improve the contamination control program. A radiation protection program shall include both monitoring of the workers (discussed in Section 4.3) and monitoring of co nditions in the workplace. Work that involves the use of temporary enclosures (greenhouses) should be provided with continuous coverage by an RCT. The rigor with which all of the various elements of a radiation monitoring program are applied should be tailored to meet the needs of the individual work areas. Each program should be designed to meet existing needs, but also should be flexible to allow for incorporation of the possible advantages. The radiation monitoring program should include documented survey procedures, a system for maintaining survey results, and contamination control limits for "fixed" and "removable" contamination. Results of contamination surveys should be reported in ac tivity per area (e.g., dpm/100 cm2) except for large‐area swipes and swipes of very small items.  continuous air monitors, survey instruments at step‐off pads, and hand and shoe counters should be functionally tested daily or once per shift. Some fixtures and support areas outside the controlled area, such as doorknobs and telephones of adjacent offices and the lunchroom should als o be surveyed daily. Other support areas should be surveyed monthly. Transuranics exist in small quantities of recycled or reclaimed feed materials. In many instances, these isotopes may be limiting for release of materials. For transuranic and uranium radionuclides, the contamination level (fixed and removable) at which surfaces are considered contaminated are listed in Appendix D of 10 CFR Part 835. The buildup of contamination in glove boxes and on gloves and equipment may contribute substantially to the external dose rates. measurements of external exposure should be made at the time a program is established at all locations where personnel exposure occurs. Surveys for total/fixed contamination include a scan survey and a statistically‐based survey. A large‐area wipe survey is used to qualitatively detect gross removable contamination. The survey is performed by wiping the surface of the area being surveyed and conducting frequent checks of the cloth using a portable instrument. Removable contamination will be accumulated and concentrated on the wipe, increasing the probability of its detection. If radioactivity above background is measured, the material is contaminated. Technical smears (i.e. 100 cm2) need to be taken to quantify removable contamination levels. For transuranic radionuclides, the guideline values for removable contamination are lower than the minimum detectable activity (MDA) of portable instruments. The purpose of a smear survey is to locate and quantify removable contamination that is known or suspected to exist. A smear or swipe survey is performed by wiping a cloth, paper, plastic foam, or fiberglass disk over a 100cm 2 area of the surface. The swipe should be taken with a dry medium using moderate pressure except for tritium. Smears may be taken over areas larger than 100 cm 2. Paper or fiberglass filter papers should be used so that alpha activity is not attenuated by becoming imbedded in the wipe. If the contaminant is an alpha‐emitter and the surface is wet, the smear should be dried before counting. A smear survey may be used routinely to detect removable contamination. If no contamination above the guideline values for removable contamination in Table 4‐1 is detected during the smear survey, the contamination is fixed, and the area should be posted appropriately. Tritium and Transuranics, Ra‐226, Ra.228, Th‐230, Th. 228, Pa‐231, Ac‐227, I.125, I‐129, I'133, and others noted above 5 1,000 5,000 The values in this table apply to radioactive contamination deposited on, but not incorporated into, the contaminated item. The maximum surface activity in any area of 100 cm2 is less than three times the value specified. STCs6 10,000 See Footnote 6 The amount of removable radioactive material per 100 cm2 of surface area should be determined by swiping the area with dry filter or soft absorbent paper. The use of dry material may not be appropriate for tritium. It is no t necessary to use swiping techniques to measure removable contamination levels if direct scan surveys indicate that the total residual surface contamination is higher than the applicable value. Tritium contamination may diffuse into the volume or matrix of materials. Once this contamination migrates to the surface, it may be removable, not fixed; therefore, a "Total" value does not apply. In certain cases, a “Total” value of 10,000 dpm/100 cm2 may be applicable. A scan survey for fixed contamination requires passing a detector over the surface of the area being surveyed at a fixed, known scan speed and at a specified distance from the surface. A scan survey should be used to survey material that resides in an area controlled for contamination purposes, or an area where unsealed radioactive sources are used. The most critical factor affecting a scan survey measurement is the speed at which scan surveys are performed. Counting time is inversely proportional to scan speed. For instruments with larger detector faces, the scan speed is faster for a given rate of meter movement because a point on the surveyed surface remains beneath the window longer. 4.2.3 Release Criteria Material in contamination, high contamination, or airborne radioactivity areas, shall be treated as radioactive material. Material that has never been in a contaminated or airborneRadioactive area may be removed to controlled areas without survey. If the history of the item is. The methodology ensures, with 67% confidence, that the guideline values of DOE Order 458.1 and 10 CFR Part 835 are met. The methodology has four main components: material evaluation, scan survey for fixed contamination, large‐area wipe survey for removable contamination, and technical smears as necessary. Material evaluation places the material into one of two categories: not potentially contaminated or potentially contaminated. Non‐radioactive material can be released without an instrument survey if its documented history ensures the following: That it has never been used or stored in an area controlled for contamination. Material history release form. used to document the release of material that is known to be free of contamination. by its history of use. If the history of the material is unknown, an instrument survey must be made of. the material. A scan survey for fixed contamination requires passing the detector of an alpha and a beta/gamma survey instrument, as applicable, over the accessible surface. If a change in the audible output is heard, the area under the window of the instrument should be re‐surveyed using a stationary measurement for 3 to 5 seconds. If the increase does not persist, the scan should continue. If contamination above background is detected, then decontamination of the material should be considered and the methodology described in this document should not be applied. Survey methodology should be used for both beta/gamma and alpha contamination. Measurements performed to release material should be made in a low‐background area. It may be prudent to bias some of the measurements toward those areas that are more likely to be contaminated. If material is being surveyed for release from a radiological area, performing measurements in a low‐background area may not be possible. If background count rates are high enough that the release guideline values cannot be measured, a survey for removable contamination should be performed to avoid spreading removable contamination.  detection of the beta/gamma radiations from uranium decay products may be a more sensitive and more appropriate monitoring technique. If the uranium is highly enriched or has been very recently processed, detection using the alpha radiation is necessary because of the high alpha:beta ratio. Because of the range and ease of shielding alpha particles, burial or surface liquid may preclude the detection of alpha radiation. Radionuclides of particular importance are 234mPa and other decay products and trace impurities such as 99Tc, 239Pu, and 231Np. Effective dose rates of up to 150 mrem/h, attributed to radium accumulation, have been measured from neoprene liner material. Contamination resulting from uranium operations may be almost totally alpha or tot ally beta/gamma‐emitters. Control of radioactive material at the source and prevention of the generation of contamination are generally more effective and less costly than remediation. ALARA Guidelines Contamination levels should be maintained ALARA to minimize the potential for the spread of contamination. The primary hazard to personnel from uranium is from internal exposure. Contamination is also of concern because of potential skin doses. Only if the primary controls fail or if there is a potential for personnel contamination during an activity are controls such as protectiv e clothing and respirators advisable. Workers should survey their gloves and coverall sleeves each time they are withdrawn from a glove box (or similar containment system) and after each glove replacement or bag‐out operation. Instrumentation should be provided and persons in a uranium workstation should be required to survey themselves at established frequencies. Employees should be clearly instructed in the required actions to take if predetermined action levels are exceeded. Frequent audits should be performed to verify that controls are adequate. Monitoring of shoes, clothing, and hands should be required prior to leaving a workstation where uranium or uranium contaminated material was handled. The instrument should clearly detect an unacceptable level of contamination. For work that involves a high potential for intake of radioactive material, engineering and administrative controls should be implemented to eliminate this potential. If these controls are inadequate, then appropriate PPE, including respirators, should be implement. Use of company issue shoes and clothing for employees with work assignments i n process areas can be a major aid in contamination control. Some facilities are using disposable anti‐ contamination clothing. This may be a cost savings from a handlin g standpoint, but disposal costs should be considered. Respiratory protection program should be in compliance with ANSI Standard Z88.2‐2015, American National Standard for Respiratory Protection (2015a) requirements. For example, a uranium metal machining operation may have both an airborne uranium oxide hazard and an airborne hazard from solvent vapors. The respirator utilized must be effective for both types of hazard. The total dose to an individual and the collective dose to the work force should be ALARA. If the individual is injured and needs prompt medical attention, medical treatment will always take precedence. If injuries are absent or do not require immediate attention, decontamination is preferable. The decision to release personnel with detectable uranium contamination is made on a case‐ by‐case basis. 4.4 Decontamination and Decommissioning Techniques. This section concentrates on decontamination techniques to be used in the final decommissioning of a uranium‐contaminated facility for unrestricted release. Some of these techniques are similar to those used during routine operations. The skin should be gently scrubbed with soap and water. Masking tape should be used to remove dry contamination. Diluted bleach with water may be applied as needed to decontaminate more effectively. DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 97 After the skin is thoroughly dry, survey it for any remaining contamination. If no contamination is detected, apply a good‐quality hand cream to prevent chapping. If contamination persists on the skin, a more abrasive decontamination method may be necessary. If contamination persists after using the abrasive soap, potassium permanganate (K mnO 4) and sodium bisulfite (NaHSO 3) should be considered. Care should be exercised to prevent damage to the skin surface. Decontamination of surface areas may be as simple as hosing off the floors with water, washing surfaces with detergent and water, or wiping with household dust cloths. For some locations, vacuuming the surfaces may be appropriate. Water and wipe material must be contained and disposed of as radioactive waste. Uranium may become imbedded in the surface. Removal of embedded material may require physical abrasion, such as scabbling, grinding, sand blasting, or chipping. If the surface is porous, complete replacement could be necessary. Internal dosimetry is an essential part of a comprehensive radiological control program at every facility where uranium is handled or processed. DOE requires that new or modified facilities be designed, operated, and remediated to prevent intakes of radioactive materials. The DOE Decommissioning Handbook also includes guidance on decontamination techniques. Most common route for inadvertent uranium intake is inhalation. Intakes can also occur by accidental ingestion or by wound contamination. Surveillance programs should be designed to rapidly detect a release in the event of a loss of radioactive material containment. When workers are inadvertently exposed to radioactive material, corrective action should be taken to ensure that control and containment are re‐established. Uranium is both a radiological and chemical hazard. An early assessment of the probable se verity of an intake and its corresponding dose is needed for decisions on dose reduction therapy and event reporting. For uranium intakes, it may take many months to obtain the bioassay data necessary for final dose assessment. Workplace conditions are monitored through air and surface contamination mon itoring programs. Individual monitoring for intakes is commonly performed using bioassay procedures. Once an intake is calculated, appropriate equivalent doses to organs and 100 tissues of concern can be estimated. 10 CFR § 835.402 requires participation in a bioassay program if a general employee is likely to exceed 0.1 rem CED from all intakes for all radionuclides in a year. Indications of intake include detection of facial or nasal contamination, positive air monitoring or sampling results. Workplace monitoring for potential internal exposures is performed to verify the adequacy of containment and work practices. This monitoring includes air sampling, continuous air monitoring, personal contamination surveys, and workplace contamination surveys. Details regarding workplace monitoring and control p ractices are discussed in Chapter 4, Contamination Control. The term "minimum detectable dose" is preferred over any variants of the occasionally encountered terms "dose‐missed" or "potentially undetected dose" The intent was to define a measure of program sensitivity to doses that might have gone undetected had an intake occurred. A design goal of 0.1 rem CED from all intakes of similar nuclides in a year is desirable but unrealistic for a routine program. To meet these requireme nts, bioassay programs should have measurement sensitivities (i.e., MDAs) established based on the material to which workers might be exposed. There may be circumstances in which the measurement technology is not available to provide the sensitivities required for the 0.1 rem goal. The radiation protection organization should take the following administrative actions: Ensure that adequate control measures are applied to prevent intakes. Upgrade bioassay measurement systems and workplace monitoring practices.  DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 102 reporting requirements for internal dosimetry data are set forth in Section 3.7 of this technical standard. measurements needed to demonstrate the quality of measurements and dose assessment should be recorded and maintained. Urine Bioassay Goals(a) for 238U Days Post‐Intake Urine Intake Retention Fraction(b) Dose Limit Goal(c) (dpm) 100‐mrem CED Goal(d) ( dpm) Type F Inhalation 1 1.85E‐01 5.55E+05 1.91E+04 7 3.47E‐03 1.58E+02 30 6.78E‐04 2.03E+03 7.00E+01 60 2.26E•04 6.28E-04 90 2.33E-05 7.32E-06 1000 2.31E‐06 6.39E-07 10000 2.32 E‐07 6.40E-01 20000 9.63E‐08 2.89E‐02 9.94E-03 The goals reflect the activity in a 24 hour urine void corresponding to either a 50 rem committed equivalent dose or a 0.1 rem CED. Goal (dpm) = Intake * IRF * 2220 dpm/nCi. The dose conversion factor (committed dose per unit intake) derived from the ICRP Publication 68 Database is shown below. Goal (dpm) = Intake * IRF * 2220 dpm/nCi, where Intake (nC i) is the 0.1 rem CED limit/ dose Conversion factor and IRF is the intake retention fraction. Type M Inhalation 1 1.08E‐01 2.53E+04 4.02E+03 7 2.21E‐03 5.10E-03 8.40E+01 30 2.72E‐04 6.00E-04 60 1.25E‐05 1.44E-05 2.34E-06 200 1.15E‐07 2.64E-07 400 2.32E‐06 6.60E-08 20000 6.39E‐10 1.92E-09 3.06E-10 10000 3.81E-11 0.9E-12 1.14E-01 The dose conversion factor (committed dose per unit intake) derived from the ICRP Publication 68 Database is shown below: (d) Calculated as Goal (dpm) = Intake * IRF * 2220 dpm/nCi, where Intake (nC i) is the 0.1 rem CED threshold/CED conversion factor and IRF is the intake retention fraction. Type F Inhalation 1 3.65E‐01 1.10E+06 3.77E+04 7 7.27E•02 2.18E+05 7.51E+03 30 3.63E‐02 1.09E-05 3.75E-04 60 2.49E-02 7.47E‐04 2.57E-03 90 2.00-2.07E-0 200 1.38E‐ 02 4.14E-01 400 1.17E‐03 1.45E-1 20000 1.79E‐ 03 5.37E-3 20000 2.02E-2 20000 3.16E-4 20000 4.39E-5 20000 5.28E-6 20000 8.08E-9.71E+01 10000 8.04E-8.02 10000 3.29E-7 20000 9.94E-10.01E+02 10000 2.20E‐07 20000 6.00E‐08 20000 7.09 E-820000 6,000 E-920000 7,500 E-1020000 8,500E-1120000 9,000E-1220000. The dose conversion factor (committed dose per unit intake) derived from the ICRP Publication 68 Database is shown below: Type F, rem/nCi Type F. Suitable for elemental or any long half‐life uranium isotope. Radiation exposure records programs must also provide for the summation of internal and external doses. The summation process is not necessarily performed under a site internal dosimetry program. It is recommended that the program coordinator recognize what is required. The following summations are identified by 10 CFR § 835.702. Doses must be calculated and recorded for any confirmed uranium intake. What constitutes a confirmed intake is discussed in Section 5.7. Along with the doses, supporting records must be maintained, including the bioassay data, assumptions, biokinetic models, and calculational methods used to estimate the doses. The effective dose limit for the embryo/fetus of a declared pregnant worker is 0.5 rem for the entire gestation period. Internal exposure monitoring is required if an intake is likely to result in more than 10% of that limit (i.e., 50 mrem for the gestation period) Minors and members of the public are limited to a total effective dose of 0.1 rem/year. Internal exposure monitoring is required if an intake is likely to result in 50% of that limit. Uranium presents both chemical and radiological toxicity risks, the relative importance of which depends on its transportability from the lung. Small, recent intakes easily mask larger, older intakes because nearly 50% of the uranium going to blood is cleared immediately through the urine. An intake of Type S material potentially resulting in a CED of 0.1 rem generally cannot be detected by routine urinalysis alone. Uranium mixtures need to be determined as part of the program technical basis. Methods for such determination may include radiochemical analysis or chemistry followed by mass spectrometry. Solubility is of major importance in uranium inhalation toxicology. Oxides of uranium tend to exhibit inhalation Type S behavior. Some compounds that have been classified as type S have shown a more rapid clearance from the lung than for other Type S compounds. As uranium ages in a residual, loose contamination form, such as might be found in old duct work, glove boxes, or other such components, it can be exp ected to undergo slow oxidation to a more insol uble form. Depleted uranium is not readily subdivided into small, respirable particles. However, depleted uranium metal can slowly oxidize under ambient environmental conditions (corrosion) The solubility of uranium oxides may be affected by the rate of oxidation. Particle size is an important consideration for inhalation exposures. The monitoring programs need to be designed to maintain exposures, including those from single acute intakes, below levels that will cause transient kidney damage. Particle size data are most readily obtainable for chronic exposure situations. Urine sampling is the preferred method of monitoring for Types F and M uranium compounds. For Type S natural uranium and all types of highly enriched uranium, radiological considerations are more limiting. Local factors concerning the diversity of chemic al forms of uranium must be taken into account. For these materials, a combination of direct and indirect monitoring may be required. For uranium bioassay, baseline measurements made before any occupational exposure can be expected to yield only dietary levels of uranium in urine or feces. A special consideration is the evaluation of intakes that include natural materials such as uranium. It is a good practice to perform such DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 111 measurements for newly hired employees, intra‐company transferees, or workers transferred from facilities where bioassays may not be required. There are two distinct decisions to be made: whether a result differs from an analytical blank, and if so, whether the amount detected is greater than what would be expected in a population that is not occupationally exposed. Exempting workers from baseline bioassay implies accepting any detectable results as likely attributable to current occupational exposure. Missing a baseline for a long‐term employee who will be placed on a routine bioassay program is not likely to be as troublesome as not obtaining a baseline. Routine, or periodic, measurements are performed on a predetermined schedule (e.g., an annual or quarterly frequency) Special bioassays are performed as follow‐up to unusual routine results or suspected intakes. End of assignment or termination measurements are done following completion of specific work or at the time of termination of employment. The purpose of a sample may affect the collection and analysis or monitoring method chosen. The date of sample collection (and possibly the time of collection) can be very important to special monitoring performed to assess intake. Workers who are considered likely to have intakes resulting in excess of 0.1 rem CED are required to participate in a monitoring program. The workers at highest risk of incurring an intake are the ones in closest contact with the material. These workers should be on a routine bioassay program designed to meet the requirements of 10 CFR Part 835. Other workers (e.g., supervisors, inspectors, observers, guards, and tour groups) who work in or visit a uranium facility are normally at a substantially lower risk. Routine bioassay monitoring should be implemented whenever quantities of uranium handled exceed the respective quantities in Table 5‐4. Although these values were derived using the older ICRP 30 models (1979), on this kilogram scale, there would not be much difference with the newer models. In vitro measurements include urinalysis, fecal analysis, and occasionally analysis of tissue, sputum, or blood samples. Methods for in vitro analysis include liquid scintillation. For a particular type of operation, the value of mass or activity that is more restrictive for the m ixture should be used.  direct bioassay (in vivo counting) is the measurement of radiations emitted from radioactive material taken into and deposited in the body. Lung, wound, and skeleton counting are examples of in vivo monitoring most commonly used for uranium and its progeny. Direct bioassays for uranium should be performed when intakes of 1 mg or more of soluble uranium are likely to occur in any one workday. Major objective of lung counting is to provide measurements of suspected intakes triggered by workplace monitoring results. Lung measurements should be made to provide an early estimate of the magnitude of the intake and resulting lung deposition. The most widely used systems for lung counting are high‐purity germanium detectors, thin sodium‐iodide detectors, and phoswich detectors. For natural and enriched uranium, the energy most commonly used for in vivo monitoring is the 185‐keV gamma that is emitted with 54% abundance from the decay of 235U. For natural uranium, approximately 50% of the activity is due to decay of 234U. Germanium detectors also must be continuously cooled with liquid nitrogen. Measurement equipment to detect and measure uranium contamination in wounds should be available at all uranium facilities. Correction for depth due to absorption of photons in the overlying tissues should be considered. Collimated detectors are useful for determining the location of the uranium in wounds. After chemical isolation, the uranium in urine samples may be determined by alpha spectrometry (gas‐flow proportional or surface‐barrier detection), alpha counting (zinc sulfide or liquid scintillation counting), or track counting. Fecal analysis is a useful procedure for evaluating the excretion of uranium and other radioactive materials. Fecal samples taken during the second and third day after an inhalation incident are likely to provide the most useful data. Workers may find fecal sampling unpleasant or objectionable, and laboratory technicians may also have aversion to fecal sample analysis. Collection kits also provide a means for collecting uncont aminated samples. The frequency of bioassay measurements should normally not be decreased because analytical results are below the detection level. It is appropriate to evaluate the probability of intake and to modify the sampling frequency based on that probability. The frequency should be maintained to confirm the proper functioning of the overall internal exposure control program. The MDA is defined in ANSI/HPS N13.30 (2011) as a measure of the detection limit. Analytical radiobioassay laboratories should meet the Acceptable MDAs (AMDAs) Estimates of MDD in terms of CED should be documented for each measurement technique, MDA, and frequency. The AMDAs fo r U bioassay are shown in Table 5‐5. The AMDAs were removed from later drafts of the ANSI standard due to possible misinterpretation of the word "acceptable" They have been replaced with test ranges for externally conducted quality control tests. The minimum frequency for routine bioassay programs is interrelated to action levels, as specified in Table 5‐6 (ANSI, 2013a). Special bioassays are taken as needed. In establishing MDD tables, it is important to consider dose contributions from all appropriate radionuclides. Uranium workers are not generally considered to be at high risk of incurring intakes that might result in CEDs of 0.1 rem or more. Workers who have the highest potential risk for an intake are those most closely working with uranium or uranium‐contaminated material. These workers should be on a routine uranium bioassay program, including urinalysis and in vivo measurements. Special bioassay programs for workers with known or suspected acute inhalation intakes of uranium or other alpha‐emitting radionuclides should include both urine and fecal sampling. Excreta samples should not be collected where they may be. More frequent measurements may permit more timely review of workplace indicators. Total urine and feces should be collected for about a week following intake. This permits a sensitive assessment of potential intake and internal dose. Longer‐term special samples collected at various times from a month to a year following intake can help to dis criminate between ingestion, Type M inhalation, and Type S inhalation. For chronic exposures to soluble uranyl compounds, more frequent bioassays should be taken. Some suggested frequencies are to sample after each work break and to sample at the beginning or end of the work week. monitoring may be done either by fecal analysis, or urinalysis methods with lower MDAs. Administering a bioassay program requires that the policies, procedures, materials, support facilities, and staff be in place. Among the administrative items to address are the following: Management policy requiring participation by appropriate workers. Arrangements with appropriate analytical laboratories. The establishment of minimum detection capability must be driven by programmatic needs, ideally related to some concept of a minimum detectable dose. Recommendations for testing criteria for radiobioassay laboratories are in ANSI N13.30. These recommendations include calculational methods and performance criteria for bias, precision, and testing levels. The choice of the measurement technique, or of a combination of techniques, depends on the radioisotopes, physicochemical forms, and exposure pathway. An appropriate bioassay program is one that does not rely on assumed transportability and will provide data from which radiation dose can be calculated. The DIL (based on 0.3 ALI as per ANSI/HPS N13.22‐2013 (2013a) was 0.06 pCi L‐1, which is below the MDA suggested as reasonable for routine uranium alpha urinalysis. A combination of urine and fecal sampling for Type S materials will allow for adequate detection of uranium. In vivo analysis is most useful for characterizing inhalation exposure of Type M or S compounds of uranium. MDAs are generally not sufficiently low to provide reliable information about systemic distribution of soluble uranium at occupational levels. The 235U decays with emission of an energetic (186‐keV) photon in high abundance that is used for in vivo monitoring of enriched uranium. Internal exposures to aged depleted uranium can be measured by taking advantage of several photons of moderate energy (63‐93 keV) emitted by the 234mPa daughter of 234Th. The other long‐lived uranium isotopes emit only low yields of low‐energy photons (60 keV), which are easily attenuated by body tissue. Home collection protocols have the advantage of being sufficiently removed from the workplace to render essentially nonexistent the potential of very low‐level contamination of the sample from external sources of uranium. Avoidance of very minor external contamination is extremely important due to the dosimetric implications of uranium in urine.  volume normalization technique typically normalizes whatever volume is collected to the ICRP Reference Man daily urine excretion volume of 1400 ml. A third method calls for collection of a standard volume (e.g., 1 liter) irrespective of the time over which the sample is obtained. This method uses the standard volume as a proxy for gender. The most common sample collection containers are 1‐liter polyethylene bottles. Wide‐mouthed bottles are preferred for convenience and sanitation. Special provisions, such as a funnel or transfer cup, may improve the esthetics of sample collection. Some concerns can exist with length of sample storage before analysis. Good radiochemistry techniques should ensure essentially complete recovery of any plate‐out or sediment. Freezing samples can preserve them, but plate-out and sedimentation upon thawing should still be expected. A quality control (QC) verification program should exist for laboratory analyses.  QC verification samples may range from 5% to 15% of the total samples processed by a large‐volume program. There are no standard or regulatory requirements for bioassay sample chain‐of‐custody provisions. Tampering with samples has not been a widely reported or suspected problem. Fecal analysis is most useful in the first few days after a known acute exposure. Urinalysis is the only reliable method for determining inhalation exposures t o Type F uranium. It also provides monitoring the excretion of systemic uranium. Procedures describing details of the bioassay program should be documented. Fecal analysis is often more likely to detect exposure to highly insoluble Type S material than urinalysis. All action levels are above the typically attainable MDA for fecal analysis of 0.1 pCi per L. It is recommended that facilities that have a significant Type S uran ium exposure potential should have fecalAnalysis capabilities. The frequency of fecal voiding varies greatly from person to person, the sample collection program must be adaptable. Flexibility in sample dates is important. Fecal sampling kits can be obtained from medical supply companies or designed by the site. Large plastic zipper‐closure bag to hold the sample, placed inside a 1‐ to 2‐liter collection bucket with a tight‐fitting lid. The bucket and bag can be held in place under a toilet seat by a trapezoid‐shaped bracket. After sample collection, the zipper bag is sealed, the lid is snapped tight on the bucket, and the bucket placed in a cardboard box. Urinalysis results should be interpreted both in terms of mass and radioactivity to ensure that the most appropriate set of action levels is used. Standard bioassay procedures are not sufficiently sensitive to detect or differentiate occupational intakes from the range of environmental background levels. For example, there may be significantly elevated uranium bioassays results in certain populations who obtain their drinking water from wells. The decision level L c (also called the critical level for detection) is the level for a given measurement that indicates the likely presence of the analyte. The L c is dependent on the probability of obtaining false positive results (type I, or alpha, error) that is acceptable to the program. The MDA is a function of the probabilities of both false positive and false negative (type II, or beta) errors and is typically based on a 5% probability for each kind of error. The MDA should not be used as a comparison with actual measurements to determine whether or not activity is present. Uranium measurements are generally relatively insensitive with regard to levels of occupational exposure concern. This applies particularly to routine chest or lung counting, skeleton counting, and liver counting. For that reason, any detection of uranium should be investigated. The farther removed in time a verification measurement is from the original measurement, the more important it becomes to factor in potential exposure.  chest counting is performed primarily to estimate activity in the lung. Plutonium and uranium are both bone‐seeking radionuclides which will deposit on those bone surfaces and can interfere with chest counting. It is possible for a person having a systemic burden of uranium from a wound in the finger to manifest a positive chest count from material translocated. Interpreting such a chest count as a lung burden can render dose estimates somewhat inaccurate. It is not unusual for measurement systems to be replaced or to change the algorithms used for calculating results over time. Step changes in data can occur and should be addressed in monitoring long‐term detectable trends. The ability to accurately quantify wound activity is highly variable, depending on the calibration of the equipment and how deeply imbedded material is in the wound. uranium facilities should have available a wound counter utilizing a thin sodium iodide or semi‐conductor (e.g., planar germanium) detector. A data review should be made to determine if the sample result was correctly determined. If the result is near the L c, it is possible that statistical fluctuation of the measurement process could account for the apparent detection. Recounting the final sample preparation once or twice can be a helpful technique to verify a result. "Abnormal" for a person with no prior history of intake should be interpreted as any detectable activity. Fecal samples are much more sensitive to detection of intakes than are urine samples. The statistical fluctuation of low‐level measurements can be particularly troublesome for long-term excretion patterns. Pitfalls to the data interpretation include highly variable individual fecal voiding patterns. While a single set of fecal data can be normalized to a daily excretion rate for Reference Man, it is not likely to improve the quality of assessment. The preferred fecal sampling protocol following an intake is to collect all the early fecal clearance. Air sample data can be used to calculate an exposure to airborne material. If air sample results are HE,50 representative of air breathed by individuals, then doses can be calculated. Longer‐term follow‐up fecal samples at nominally 30, 60, and 90 days post‐intake should substantially improve the classification of material as Type M or S. General air sampling programs should be augmented by breathing zone sampling when air concentrations to which individuals are exposed might be highly variable. Breathing zone sampling may include both fixed‐location and personal (lapel) air samplers. Personal air samples are more likely to be representative of actual exposure conditions.  Understanding the behavior of uranium in the body is essential for being able to model the uranium body burden on the basis of a bioassay. Dose assessment involves collecting and analyzing information concerning a potential intake and developing a conclusion regarding the magnitude of intake and its associated committed dose equivalents. Computer codes are commonly used for assessment of intakes, dose calculation, and bioassay or body content projections. It is essential that good professional judgement be used in evaluating potential intakes and assessing internal doses. Internal dosimetry code users should understand how the code works and be aware of its limitations. Not all material taken into the body is retained. For a wound intake, material may be initially deposited at the wound site. Once the material has been deposited, it can be taken up into systemic circulation. Use of a particular computer code does not necessarily mean a dose estimate is correct.  DOE Order 5480.11 (now superseded) required calculation of dose equivalent. Now, 10 CFR Part 835 has codified the calculation of intakes and committed doses. There are several published methods for estimating intake from bioassay data. These methods each employ an idealized mathematical model of the human body. An intake retention function (IRF) is a simplified mathematical description of the complex biokinetics of a radioactive material in the human body. These functions are used to predict the fraction of an intake that will be present in any compartment of th e body, including excreta, at any time post‐intake. When multiple data points are available for a compartment, the intake can be estimated using an unweighted or weighted least‐squares fitting procedure. As an alternative, data can be fit by eye to a graphical plot. Intake can also be estimated from air sample data, as described in Section 5.7.4. Historically, intake as described in the foregoing section was not always calculated when assessing uranium exposures. Estimates of uptake using recognized methods (Langham 1956, Healy 1957, Lawrence 1987) focused on assessing the magnitude of radioactivity retained in the body. The ALIs are commonly rounded in most tabulations to one significant figure. Substantial variation can occur as a result of unit conversion. This method also raises a question about which ALI should be used if compliance monitoring is being based on comparison with secondary limits, such as the ALI. Reference and action levels are essential to operation of a routine internal dosimetry program. A wide range of levels can be defined by various facilities and organizations. A regression analysis should be used to fit the measurement values for estimating the initial intake and clearance half‐times. Table 5‐7. Uranium Levels for Internal Dosimetry Notification Indicator Notification Level Nasal or mouth smears Detectable activity Facial contamination (direct measurement) 200 dpm Skin breaks or blood smears Any skin break while handling material other than sealed sources Head, neck contamination 2,000 dpm Contamination in respirator Detectableactivity inside respirator after use Hands, forearms, clothing(a) 10,000dpm Airborne radioactivity Acute intake equivalent to 40 DAC‐hours after accounting for respiratory protection factor. The decision to administer treatment and the treatment protocol are solely the responsibilities of the physician in charge. Guidelines for the medical intervention of a radionuclide intake can be found in several publications. The CEC/DOE Guidebook has been based on the ALI for action levels, rather than on CED. ICRP recommends in Publication 60 (1991b) a limit of 2‐rem/y (20‐mSv/y) on effective dose. Guidance in the CEC/DOE Guidebook can be summarized as follows: DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 134. Lung lavage is the only recommended treatment, and it is only a consideration for intakes exceeding 100 times the ALI. A useful method to enhance excretion of uranium via the kidneys is the formation of radionuclide complexes using the kidneys. An initial prophylactic chelation therapy may be appropriate because bioassay measurements (particularly urinalysis) cannot usually be completed within the response time required. Urinalysis becomes very helpful because there is a direct correlation between urinary excretion and dose averted. It is probable that the efficacy of treatment will decrease with continued administration as uranium is removed. Most intakes of uranium are accidental. Uranium facilities and operating procedures are designed to prevent intakes. All employees suspected of having received an intake of uranium should be referred for special bioassay measurements. Any level of contamination on a nasal swab indicates an intake that should be investigated. Special bioassay should also be initiated if uranium contamination is found on the worker in the vicinity of nose or mouth. Lack of detection on nasal smears cannot be taken as evidence that an intake did not occur. Inhalation intake estimations based on DAC‐hours exposure are straightforward.  direct bioassay measurements should be taken before, during, and after the period of rapid clearance of activity. Urine and fecal samples collected after known or suspected inhalation incidents should also be used to estimate the magnitude of the intake. Initial assessments of intakes from contaminated wounds are based primarily on wound count and urinalysis data. Uranium, Soluble Potential kidney toxicity Chest count >MDA (14‐21 mg) Consider therapy Na or Ca bicarbonate; intestinal adsorbents. If soluble component is present, then urine sampling is appropriate. Lung lavage a. Use same action levels as above for soluble uranium. The special bioassay monitoring program is initiated following a known or suspected intake. This information is needed for dose assessment and future exposure management. The frequency of bioassays will depend on the specific case to be evaluated. Selection of the appropriate sampling frequency is based on the previously discussed performance capabilities. If a worker accidentally inhales or ingests uranium or is injured by a uranium‐contaminated object, the action plan should be initiated immediately. A rapid response is important because any delay in implementing appropriate action could increase the probability for internalized uranium to deposit in the kidneys or on bone surfaces. Emergency action plan includes: a. Instructions for immediate medical care, decontamination, monitoring, and longer‐ term follow-up response; b. Provisions for periodically reviewing, updating, and rehearsing the emergency action plan. The sequence and priority of the emergency plan may vary with the magnitude and type of accidental conditions and their severity. The affected worker has the responsibility to inform the health physicist, radiological control technician (RCT), or his immediate supervisor. The health physicist should immediately begin to gather data on the time and extent of the incident. Radionuclide identity, chemical form, and solubility classification should be determined. All urine and feces should be collected and labeled for analysis. Chemical contamination and acids should be washed immediately from the skin. Contaminated clothing and other objects should be saved for later analysis. smears sho uld be obtained immediately if an intake by inhalation is suspected. Sodium bicarbonate should be available for treating int ernal uranium contamination. The worker to be treated must first be informed of the proposed use of a chelating agent, instructed on the purpose of administering the chelates, and warned about the possible side‐effects. The workers must then g ive signed consent before chelation therapy may be initiated. Medical treatment for contaminated wounds may include flushing with saline and decorporating solutions, debridement, and surgical excision of the wound. Decontamination should continue until all radioactivity has been removed or until risk of permanent physical impairment is reached. The external dosimetry program is an integral part of the external dose control program. Measuring the external radiation exposure and the resultant dose is complicated by the many radiations involved in uranium handling. Uranium has a wide distribution of beta. 10 CFR Part 835 specifies the applicable limits used for control of external radiations. The elements of the external dose control program are: detection and characterization of the beta, gamma, and neutron radiation fields; measurement of personnel dose; and determination and establishment of dose control practices. Table 6‐1 lists the appropriate depths in tissue for measurement of doses. In 1994, the ICRP introduced a major revision in recommended radiation protection practice. The new methodology expands on a "risk‐based" system of dose limitation. Stochastic effect is defined as one for which the probability of the effect occurring (as opposed to the degree or severity of effect) is a function of radiation dose. Equivalent dose (HT), which is the absorbed dose averaged over tissue or organ due to radiation, is given by the equation: HT = LwR DT,R R. The equivalent dose is not always the appropriate quantity for use in relations to deterministic effects because the values of radiation weighting factors (w T) have been chosen to reflect the relative biological effectiveness of the different types of radiation.  effective dose (E) is the summation of the products of the equivalent dose received by specified tissues or organs of the body. Effective dose is expressed in terms of rem (or Sv). E = L wT HT DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 142 Where: WT is the tissue weighting factor (See Table 6‐3) HT is the equivalent doses in rem ( or Sv) Table 6•3. Tissue Weighting Factors Organs or tissues, T Tissue weighting factors, wT Gonads 0.20 Red bone marrow 0.12 Colon 0. 12 Lungs 0.10 Stomach 0.08 Bladder 0.05 Breast 0.04 Esophagus0.05 Thyroid 0.01 Bone surfaces 0. 01 Remainder(a) “1.0 0 “ Small intestine (640), kidneys (310), muscle (28,000), pancreas (100), spleen (180), thymus (20), and uterus (80) Table 6‐4 lists the annual radiation dose limits for DOE activities. DOE contractors usually establish lower annual administrative control levels. It is difficult to measure the effective dose equivalents specified in Table 6‐4 because it is necessary to know not only the type of radiation but also its energy and direction. If the flux, energy, and direction of incidence are known, it is possible to calculate effective dose equivalent using fluence to effective dose equivalent conversion coefficients. Conversion coefficients for photons in various irradiation geometries, including planar sources, can be found in a report by Zankl et al. (1994) This approach will provide more accurate values of effective dose equivalent. Table 6‐4. Radiation Dose Limits for DOE and DOE Contractors Type of Radiation Exposure Limit Occupational Exposures of Adults Stochastic Effects Deterministic Effects Lens of eye Extremity Skin Individual organ or tissue. 1. Stochastic Effects Deterministic Effects (Lens of eye, extremity, skin, individual organ , or tissue) 0.1‐rem per year (sum of effective dose from external exposures and CED received during year) 10% of occupational dose limits for adults Embryo/fetus of a Declared Pregnant Worker 0.5‐rem equivalent dose per gestation period Planned Special Exposure Same as routine occupational doses in a year (but accounted for separately)  ambient dose equivalent, H*(d), is the dose equivalent at a depth, d, in a 30‐cm‐diameter sphere of tissue. The depth of interest is typically 1 cm of soft tissue, as specified in 10 CFR Part 835. Personal dose equivalent is the equivalent in soft tissue at the appropriate depth below a specified point on the body. DOE instruments and personnel dosimeters used at DOE facilities are calibrated in terms of equivalent dose. Depending on the irradiation geometry and energy, effective dose equivalent may be as much as a factor of two less than dose equivalent. In cases where personnel are approaching dose limits, it may be prudent to more accurately evaluate effective dose equivalents using special calibrations. This section outlines methods to calculate the dose equivalents from radiations emitted by uranium and its progeny. Examples of measured dose rates are also included. The design of an external dose control program is dependent upon the type and intensity of the radiation fields to which the workers will be exposed. The ratio of uranium isotopes in a specific process will determine the source term by which the radiation fields can be predicted. Radiation fields from uranium are frequently dominated by contributions from daughter product or impurity radionuclides. During melting and casting operations, these daughter elements may concentrate on the surface of the castings and equipment. Uranium is an alpha‐emitter and is of concern if inhaled or ingested into the body. The skin is an effective barrier to alpha particles, and contamination is only a problem if there is a wound or break in the skin. For uranium enrichments up to 30%, the beta radiation field is dominated by contributions from 238U decay products. Beta doses to the skin, extremities, and (sometimes) the lens of the eye can be limiting in facilities that process unshielded depleted, natural, or low‐enrichment uranium. Potentially significant skin exposure from uranium occurs primarily from the 234mPa betas at tissue depths of 4 mg/cm2 and greater. Surface beta dose rates on the order of 1 to 20 rad per hour have been observed. Beta particles are shielded by rubber gloves or other protective devices or are usually absorbed within the dead layer of skin. Gamma radiation from uranium is normally not the controlling challenge to radiation protection. For example, the contact beta radiation field from depleted uranium is approximately 240 mrem/h.  gamma fields can exist in areas where large quantities of uranium are stored. Bremsstrahlung from the 2.29 MeV 234mPa beta can contribute up to 40% of the photon dose from uranium metal. Neutron fields from enriched uranium fluoride compounds can also add to this area of concern. Neutron radiation from uranium metals and low enriched compounds is considerably lower than the gamma component and, consequently, is not limiting. Neutron dose equivalent rates can be calculated accurately with computer codes, such as the Monte Carlo NeUTron Program (MCNP) Table 6‐5 lists spontaneous fission yields for uranium isotopes that may be found in facilities within the DOE complex. neutron dose equivalent rates can also be calculated from simple empirical formulas. Unlike gamma doses, there is very little self‐ shielding for neutrons in sub‐kilogram masses of uranium. Table 6‐6 lists the alpha‐neutron yields for oxides and fluorides for the uranium isotopes. Energetic alpha particles can overcome coulomb barriers in low‐atomic‐number elements. The total neutron yield per gram of uranium can be found by summing the neutron yields per gram. Multiplying the specific neutron yield (neutrons per second per gram (nps/g) of uranium by the mass of uranium (grams) gives S, the neutron emission rate. In order to sum the three contributions, it is necessary to convert the values in Table 6‐7. The specific activity of U‐234 is converted from Ci/g to disintegrations per second each per gram. This section describes the response of portable instruments, personnel dosimeters, and nuclear accident dosimeters to the radiations emitted by uranium. Neutron emissions may range from negligible to significant. Data are also included on special spectrometry instruments used to calibrate dosimeters in the nuclear industry. Most commercially‐ available radiation survey instruments under‐respond to beta radiation fields from uranium. At best, typical "beta correction factors" (true dose rate/indicated dose rate) are on the order of 1.5 to 2.5. This under‐response is due primarily to the angular response of the detector. Meter Readings for an Open Drum of UF 4 (green salt) DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 154 Table 6‐8. Instrument Response to Uranium Beta Fields Instrument Window (mg/cm2) Beta Correction Factor(a) Exposure Geometry Victoreen 471 1.1 1.4 30cm from U foils Eberline RO‐2 7 2.0 30 cm from Ufoils eberlineRO‐2A 7 4.0 Contact with DU slab Aluminum‐walled GM Detector 30 1.7 30 cm  from U foil HPI‐1075 7 1.8 Contact with du slab Teletector 30 (low range) 50 The construction of most survey instruments (e.g., "cutie pie") leads to a severe angular dependence when measuring beta radiation fields. This angular dependence results from the attenuation of the beta field by the walls of the detector as the window is moved away from the source. Figure 6‐6 demonstrates the response of a tissue equivalent response (a 5 mg/cm 2 detector) Measurements taken close to small beta sources may be inaccurate due to non‐uniform irradiation of the sensitive volume of the detector. Uranium in most DOE facilities tends to present wide‐area sources of beta radiation. Characteristics of instrument construction may significantly affect their response and use.  instruments have "beta windows" that are intended to discriminate between beta and gamma radiation. Up to 10% or 20% of the "gamma only" reading may be due to the higher‐energy betas penetrating the beta window. Occasionally, survey instruments are placed in plastic bags or covered to protect them from becoming contaminated. Survey instruments are typically calibrated with 137Cs (0.662‐MeV) photons. Typical portable survey instruments demonstrate a fairly flat energy response above 250 keV. The response below 250keV can be variable to a greater or lesser degree depending upon the instrument design. Figure 6‐9 shows a typical gamma spectrum from a uranium oxide source.  Gamma Flux (photons/cm2/sec) Source Description or Location 30 to 225 keV 675 to 1050 keV Ratio Crucible load station ‐ 55‐gal. drum 990 348 2.8 Beside UO 3 barrel 538 159 3.4 Open UO3 barrel 919 232 4.0 Tube‐cutting work station, metal 253 58 4.4 Outside Plant 9 south entrance, near 776 165 4.7 exhaust fan Box of black top crop at 25 cm 848 154 5.5 Lathe work station 424 76 5.6 Background outside Building 3045 “35” 5 7.0 Near "thorium" hopper. Neutron surveys at uranium facilities depends on the quantity of uranium present, its form, and the potential for (α,n) reactions. Calibrati on with sources that emit neutron energies similar to those in the facility will assist in accurately measuring the radiation fields. The DOELAP accreditation program has been established to provide a level of confidence in dosimetry services in DOE facilities. The standard includes some tests that differ from those in ANSI N13.11‐ 2022 (2022a ), on which the NVLAP program is based. Personnel dosimeters produce the data that become the formal or "legal" record of personnel exposure. These detectors experience many of the same energy dependence and angular response problems encountered by survey instruments. The most difficult problem is relating badge results to the shallow or skin dose. Film badges and nuclear track detectors are other types of dosimeters. An ideal dosimeter would directly measure doses at 7, 1000, and perhaps 300 mg/cm2 (shallow, deep, and lens of eye doses) In practice, the dose at such depths in tissue must be inferred from a combination of measurements with different filters. Personnel dosimeters are beta energy‐dependent for the same reason that survey instruments are. TLD chips of lithium fluoride are about 240 mg/cm2 thick. Significant attenuation of the beta field takes place through the body of the chip. Other TLD systems minimize this problem by adhering a thin layer of TL powder onto a plastic backing. Detectors that are very thin minimize energy‐dependence. Calibration of these systems should be performed by a person with specific expertise in the detector’s system and knowledge of badge response to high beta or mixed beta and gamma radiation fields. Beta and gamma fields in working areas should be well‐characterized. Badge reading frequency should be long enough to accumulate a significant dose. Dosimeter change frequencies can vary with the specific work‐site conditions. The dosimetry system used shall meet or be specifically excepted from DOELAP standards. Dosimetry systems should be capable of providing routine results within a reasonable time period. Badge reading systems should have established "action levels" to alert technicians or operators of unusual results. The potential for badge contamination should be minimized. If possible, the system should automatically save glow curves of any unusual result. Measurement of the dose to the hands and/or forearms typically are made with TLD chips or TL powder in finger rings or wrist dosimeters. Such devices do not allow for all of the sophisticated energy discrimination just discussed. Care should be exercised in preventing "obvious" underestimations of extremity dose. Dosimeters worn on the wrist have been shown to underestimate the beta dose to the fingers and palm. The general methods used to calibrate dosimeters are given in the National Bureau of DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 162 Standards Special Publication 633, Procedures for Calibrating Neutron Personnel Dosimeters. These requirements are given in DOE STD‐1111‐ 2018, Department of Energy Laboratory Accreditation Program Administration (2018a ) and its associated guidance documents. records and data retrieval systems, before the dosimeter processor is certified. Table 6‐10. Performance Test Categories, Radiation Sources, and Test Ranges for the DOELAP and NVLAP Programs. At present, only personnel dosimeters for whole body irradiations are required to be tested. Extremity dosimeters may be voluntarily tested. In the near future DOE secondary calibration laboratories will be established to increase the consistency of radiation protection instrument calibrations to national standards. Relationship between quality factor and LET was derived from biological experiments on cancer induction. There are no blood‐forming organs in the extremities, so there is no biological basis for large values of quality factors for extremity exposures. It is suggested and is a common practice in most fabrication areas to require the use of safety glasses. Good housekeeping practices are vital to keep dose rates low. Ev en invisible dust layers on the interior surfaces of glove boxes can increase radiation fields. Storing gloves inside the glove box when not in use and placing lightweight "pie plate" shields over the glove‐port openings are examples of practices that can significantly reduce dose rates. High dose rates (more than a few mrem/hour) or extended exposures should be reviewed for possible reductions in a worker’s exposure time. Even short distances can affect significant dose reductions. Shielding is probably the most widely used (and most effective) method of reducing beta doses from uranium. The lower atomic number and less dense shielding materials are used whenever possible to eliminate bremsstrahlung as well as beta radiation fields. Protective clothing commonly worn in the nuclear industry can also afford beta dose reduction. Particular attention should be paid to the use of gloves for "hands‐on" work. Uranium Beta Shielding Material Approximate Material Thickness Required to Stop 234mPa Betas, cm Air 850 Aluminum 0.41 Lead 0.10 Lucite 0.92 Pyrex Glass 0.49 Polyethylene 1.2 Stainless Steel (347) 0.14 Water 1.7 (approx.) Uranium 0.06  beta radiation field from uranium is strictly a surface phenomenon. Dose reduction programs can take advantage of this fact in some circumstances. Large plates or sheets of uranium metal, if stored in racks ’ledge on," will present less of a beta (and gamma) radiation field. Nuclear criticality safety and radiological control personnel in a uranium facility need to know for the DOE mission to be accomplished in a safe and cost-effective manner. Health physicists and other radiation protection personnel have the technical responsibility to understand nuclear principles and the impact of these principles.  radiation protection personnel are the focus of emergency response actions should an inadvertent nuclear criticality o ccur. These actions include use of emergency instrumentation, accident dosimetry, radiolo gical dose assessment, and recovery. Radiation protection personnel must also be aware of the potential impacts of their actions. Nuclear criticality safety program requirements for DOE facilities are presented in DOE O 420.1C Chg 3, Facility Safety (2019 b) The program requires the development of a well‐documented Criticality Safety Program and incorporates compliance with ANSI/ANS‐8 nuclear criticalitysafety standards. Criticality safety requirements support the documented safety analysis required by 10 CFR Part 830, Subpart B. requirements for criticality safety are contained in Attachment 2, Chapter 3 DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 168 of the DOE Order 420.1C Chg 3 ( 2019b) Some of the criticality safety controls used maintain a system in a subcritical state are described below. Enriched uranium is normally required to provide sufficient fissionable material to sustain a critical nuclear plant. Enrichment of uranium is a process that produces fissile uranium. The minimum mass of uranium that will sustain a chain reaction under specified conditions is called the critical mass. The minimum critical mass depends on 235U enrichment and other factors, such as the amount of moderator. A uniform solution or slurry less than 10.8 gm 235U /l will be subcritical at any volume. A moderator is a material that slows down fast neutrons. The most effective moderators are those materials having a low atomic weight. The moderator concentration is usually expressed as the ratio of hydrogen atoms to the number of fissionable atoms of the isotope. A reflected system is an assembly where the fissionable material is partly or wholly surrounded by another material having a greater neutron scattering cross‐section than air. Water, concrete, graphite, and stainless steel are typically "good" reflectors, although any material will serve as a reflector. Leakage of neutrons from a system depends on the shape of the system and on the neutron‐ reflecting properties of surrounding materials. thickness of water surrounding the fissionable material beyond 8 inches does not significantly decrease the critical Mass (Paxton et. al., 1986). 7.2.1. Neutron absorbers (poisons) are nonfissionable materials that capture neutrons. Number of neutrons available for a fission reaction. Cadmium, boron, and chlorine are examples of neutron absorbers. Boron in borosilicate glass Raschig rings and chlorine in polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) rings are poisons.  neutron detectors may be effective in identifying uranium deposits. multichannel analyzers, can ofte n provide adequate sensitivity to determine holdup deposits. If intervening shielding reduces sensitivity and/or background gamma radiation levels are too great, it is useful to have a correlation from "cpm" to exposure or dose units. An effective nuclear criticality safety program requires a joint effort by managers, supervisors, workers, and nuclearcriticality safety staff. It relies on conformance with operating procedures by all involved personnel. The following sections describe the key elements of a nuclearCriticality Safety Program. The nuclear criticality safety organization should report to the highest level of facility management independent of operations. An independent expert should evaluate the technical adequacy of the nuclearcriticality safety program periodically. The organization should also have an independent nuclearCriticality safety review committee. The purpose of procedures is to facilitate the safe and efficient conduct of operations. The processes of procedure development, review, t raining, and approval should have sufficient controls to ensure that nuclear criticality concerns are properly addressed. These controls include periodically reviewing and reaffirming procedures, and properly investigating procedure deviations. Procedures should exist that address the determination and posting of nuclear criticality safety parameters. These procedures should include a description of how the limits are to be determined. Recovery procedures should be in place to provide for the recovery from a criticality control limit violation. Nuclear criticality safety training is required by ANSI/ANS‐8.20, Nuclear Criticality Safety Training (1991) Inspections and audits are performed to assess the success of the nuclearcriticality safety program. Qualified individuals who are independent of the operation should perform the inspections and audits. Nuclear Facility Safety Analysis Documented Safety Analyses (DSA) document the analysis and potential consequences of accidents and abnormal occurrences at nuclear facilities. Deficiencies should be formally addressed, tracked, reported, and resolved. Criticality accidents can either be single pulse, multiple pulse, or "steady state" (continuous) excursions. Criticality accidents can result in lethal doses of neutron and gamma radiation at considerable distances from the accident site. If there is no loss of material as the solut ion cools, it may form a critical mass once again and pulse with slightly lower fission yield. There can also be high level beta‐gamma residual radiation levels. The heat generated during the excursion can melt parts of the system that contain the fissionable material (Moe 1988). Moe reviewed estimated prompt radiation doses from excursions in a moderated system and a metallic system, as well as dose rates from residual contamination left by a criticality excursion. Workers should immediately run from the work area when the criticality alarm is sounded. Seconds can save significant dose, if not from the e xcursion itself, then from any residual radiation that is in the area. Current criticality safety practice has been influenced both by the overall experience of the nuclear industry and by the analysis of the accidental criticality excursions. There have been 22 criticality accidents in chemical process facilities. All accidents have been dominated by design, managerial, and operational failures. The focus for accident prevention should be on these issues. Guidelines for criticality alarm systems and nuclear accident dosimetry are presented in this section. The need for a CAAS shall be evaluated for all activities in which the inventory of fissionable material in individual unrelated work areas exceeds 700 g of 235U, 520 g of 233U, 450 g of 239Pu or 450g of any combination of these three isotopes. Paxton noted lives have been saved in past criticality accidents by radiation alarms coupled with effective evacuation procedures. A CAAS should include a criticality detection device and a person nel evacuation alarm. Nuclear accident dosimetry shall also be provided, as otherwise required. If the probability of criticality is greater than 10‐6 per year, then only the criticality detector system is needed. The alarm trip point shall be set low enough to detect the minimum accident of concern. The alarm signal shall activate promptly (i.e., within 0.5 second) when the dose rate at the detectors equals or exceeds a value equivalent to 20 rad /min. At least two detectors shall be at the alarm level before initiating the alarm; in redundant systems, failure of any single channel shall not prevent the CAAS from functioning. A nuclear accident dosimetry program shall include the following: a. a method to conduct initial screening of individuals involved in a nuclear accident to determine whether significant exposures have occurred; b. a system of fixed nuclear accident Dosimeter units. A nuclear accident dosimetry program should provide absorbed dose information within 24 hours after the incident. Discussions on initial screening evaluations to segregate exposed from unexposed individuals are found in several references. A common initial screening method is to provide all workers with an indium foil in their personnel dosimeter or security badge. Sodium‐24 has a 15‐hour half‐life and releases a 1.4‐MeV beta (maximum energy) and two gammas (1.37 MeV and 2.75 MeV) A beta‐ gamma survey meter is used to measure the 24Na activity in the blood by placing the detector probe against the individual’s abdomen and having the individual bend forward to enclose the detector. Differences in incident neutron energy spectrum, orientation, and measurement techniques can cause significant errors in estimated radiation dose. Swaja and Oyan (1987) showed radiation doses estimated from induced body activity can vary by a factor of approxi mately 2. A comprehensive nuclear criticality dosimetry system should consist of stationary (fixed‐ location, area) dosimeters, neutron and gamma dosimeters worn by personnel (i.e., PNADs), and specialized laboratory equipment. Fixed nuclear accident dosimeter units should be capable of determining neutron doses in the range of 10 rad to 10,000 rad with an accuracy of ±25%. The general criteria of ANSI N13.3‐2013 (2013b) for nuclear accident dosimeters are reviewed below. PNADs should be worn by all individuals who enter a controlled area. Dosimeters, both fixed and personnel, should be protected against radioactive contamination to avoid false measurements. Neutron dose per unit fluence is strongly dependent on neutron energy. Neutrons with energies greater than 100 keV contribute most of the dose. Techniques for estimating the effect of body orientation at the time of the exposure should also be developed. Gamma dose can be determined by TLD, film, or radiophotoluminescent glass. For unshielded assemblies, the gamma‐to‐neutron ratio can range from 0.1 for a small heavy metal system up to approximately 3 for asmall hydrogen‐moderated solution system. Most measurements that failed to meet the accuracy standards overestimated the actual dose. The threshold detector unit (TDU) is the most accurate type of nuclear accident neutron dosimeter. The use of neutron activation of sulfur in hair (32S(n,p)32P) is another method to estimate absorbed dose for workers involved in a criticality accident. More sophisticated laboratory analysis of blood samples can be performed to obtain a more accurate estimate of worker dose. The radiological control staff should have a basic understanding of program structure, engineering criteria, and administrative controls as related to nuclear criticality safety. The health physicist's primary responsibilities with regard to nuclearcriticality safety include emergency instrumentation and emergency response actions. The radiological control staff should maintain an adequate monitoring capability for a nuclear criticality accident. calibrating, repairing, and maintaining the neutron criticality alarm detectors and nuclear accident dosimeters. The staff should also be familiar with locations and scenarios for designing the fixed nuclear accident Dosimetry program and formulating plans for emergency response. The priorities of the radiological control staff during a criticality event should be to rescue personnel, prevent further incidents or exposures, and quickly identify those who have been seriously exposed. These emergency procedures include evacuation routes, personnel assembly areas, personnel accountability, care and treatment of injured and exposed persons. Surveyors/analysts should compare field results to pre‐established activity‐dose relationships to determine if a worker was exposed. Other indicators, such as a discharged self‐reading dosimeter, could also indicate a possible exposure. The more accurate analyses should include: 1) better definition of source characteristics, 2) location of moderating materials, and 3) location and orientation of the person(s) at the time of exposure. Radiological control staff should be responsible for retrieving fixed nuclear accident dosimeters and ensuring that PNADs from any exposed workers are submitted for analysis. Some strippable coatings and surface‐fixing films are effective neutron moderators. Nuclear criticality safety specialists should be consulted when using these coatings. A material is a waste once there is no identified use or recycle value for it. Normally, wastes are considered by their physical form as either solids, liquids, or gasses. By careful engineering, waste generation, and treatment alternatives, a site can minimize the total waste volume. The treatment of excess materials to reclaim uranium is not a waste treatment process. Uranium may be entrained in the air, may contaminate equipment, materials, or other scrap, or may be contained in low concentrations in liquid wastes and effluents. For this reason, it is important to prevent comingling, mixing, dissolving, etc. of uranium with hazardous waste. Wastes resulting from operation of a uranium facility may include radioactive, nonradioactive, and mixed materials in the form of liquids and gaseous effluent or solids. Uranium recovery operations and processes are an operational feature of most major facilities handling large quantities of material. Accounting for waste management for solid and liquid wastes is discussed below. Facilities should provide for the safe collection, packaging, inventory, storage, and transportation of solid waste that is potentially contaminated with radioactive materials. All packages containing potentially contaminated solid waste should be appropriately monitored. Industrial wastes such as discharge from mop sinks, overflow from positive pressure circulating waste systems, and process steam condensate (if existing) should be analyzed, collected and transferred. Liquid process wastes should be collected and monitored near the source of generation before batch transfer through appropriate pipelines or tank transfer to a liquid waste treatment plant or area. Sanitary wastes include the nonradioactive wastes usually found at a facility. Consideration of nuclear criticality (See previous section) is necessary to prevent accidents. Sanitary sewers should discharge into an onsite, approved sanitary‐sewage treatment system. Current Federal, state, and local codes regarding the discharge of sanitary wastes must be met. Air filtration to reduce the concentration of contaminants in the air effluent. Effluents from the uranium‐handling facility include air and other gaseous exhausts and liquid wastes. The contamination in the effluents should be kept ALARA, commensurate with best available technology at the time of design. Filter systems should be designed so that the effluent concentrations of uranium should not exceed the inhaled concentration. The following sections provide information about treating airborne, liquid, and solid wastes. 8.3.1 Airborne Wastes Ventilation control systems within a plant are designed to move air from outside "clean" areas to process areas. Provisions should be made for retention systems for liquid effluents.  prefilters are used to remove significant quantities of particulate material from the air off‐gas. They are generally placed before high‐efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters in order to extend the life of the more expensive filters. See section 8.3.3 for disposition of HEPA filters. Hold tanks are used to collect liquid effluent prior to release. The liquid can be processed or treated to remove radioactive material or neutralize chemicals. Settling basins are frequently used to provide a means of reducing effluents further before releasing them to offsite areas. Solid waste come from a variety of sources in the plant from machining chips to contaminated clothing. The solid wastes should be concentrated (if possible and/or practical), packaged, and stored on the plant site for an interim time period prior to permanent disposal. Careful documentation is necessary to establish: a) quantities and nature of the waste being disposed, and b) compliance with the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 8.4 Monitoring Monitoring the airborne effluents is an important aspect of control and documentation. Monitoring should be done in the stack at the discharge point and at the boundary of the uncontrolled area. If stack monitoring cannot be performed, then the reason for the monitoring method selected should also be documented. Air and other gaseous effluents from confinement areas should be exhausted through a ventilation system. All exhaust ducts (or stacks) that may contain fissile contaminants should be provided with two monitoring systems. One should be of the continuous type (CAM) and the other a passive sampler. Nuclear criticality safety should be considered in the design of equipment used to treat and clean up radioactive gaseous effluents. The probes for sampling purposes should be designed for isokinetic sampling and located according to good industrial hygiene practices. The design of effluent monitoring systems should appropriately meet ANSI N42.18‐2014. Nuclear criticality, confinement, sampling, volume determination, and retrievability of liquids and solids should be required in the design of collection systems. The size of the collection system for firefighting water should be based on the maximum amount of water which would be collected in fighting the Design Basis Fire. Uranium facilities shall have a waste‐minimization and pollution prevention program. The preferred method is to reduce the total volume and/or toxicity of hazardous waste generated at the source. The waste minimization program applies to all present and future activities of the facilities. Waste minimization is to be considered for all future programs and projects in the design stages, and should be included in all maintenance and/or construction contracts. All managers of facilities or activities that generate hazardous, radioactive, and mixed waste are responsible for minimizing the volume and toxicity of all radioactive, hazardous, and radioactive mixed waste. Waste volume control, or waste minimization, involves limiting the amount of material that becomes contaminated. Sometimes, materials can be completely cleaned so that disposal as non‐radioactive solid waste (or refurbishment in clean areas) is an option. Program design decisions can affect uranium waste generation. In many nuclear facilities, contamination of packaging materials is a problem. If a tool or material is to be used in a contaminated area, as much of the packaging material must be removed before the material enters the radiological area. Water‐washable, reusable protective clothing may minimize waste disposal. Disposable surgeons' gloves can be surveyed and disposed of as non‐radioactive solid waste rather than LLW or TRU waste. Tools should be of the highest quality and maximum flexibility consistent with the situation. All tools and equipment to be placed in a contaminated environment should be tested for reliability.  DOE policy is to deal with operational emergencies in a way that minimizes consequences to workers, the public, and the environment. The following discussion of emergency management principles, requirements and guidance is generally applicable to DOE uranium facilities. Specific facility requirements are in accordance with the individual facility DOE contract.  DOE emergency management policy and direction is based on the following: planning and preparedness commensurate with hazards; integrated planning for health, safety, and environmental emergencies; classification of and graded response to emergencies; and multiple levels of emergency management responsibility. Management Guides (EMGs) provide guidance for implementing DOE Order 151.1D (2019a ).  DOE Order 151.1D ( 2019a ) requires that the details of each feature be tailored to the unique hazards of the facility. This approach provides a more complete and quantitative understanding of the hazards while providing for focused and cost‐effective emergency planning and preparedness. Planning, preparedness , and response requirements applicable to DOE facilities and activities for some types of emergency conditions are specified by other agencies. Rather than meet thes e requirements piecemeal through separate programs, each DOE/NNSA site/facility must have an Emergency Management Core Program that implements the requirements of applicable Federal, State, and local laws. The responsibility and authority for recognizing, classifying, and mitigating emergencies always rests with the facility staff. The cognizant Field Element Managers oversees the response of contractors and supports the response. The responsibilities vested at each level of the hierarchy are specified in DOE Order 151.1D ( 2019a ).  DOE Headquarters (HQ) Emergency Operations Center (EOC) receives, coordinates, and disseminates emergency information to HQ elements, the cognizant PSO, Congressional offices, the White House, and other Federal Agencies. The Order requires that a Hazard Survey be used to identify the generic emergency events or conditions that define the scope of the emergency management program. The Order requires a facility‐specific Emergency Planning Hazards Assessment (EPHA) be conducted and the results used as the technical basis for the program element content. Detailed guidance on the implementation of the Order requirements has been published by the DOE Office of Emergency Management. The Emergency Management Core Program must be based on a Hazards Survey. It is intended to supplement, not replace, the more general recommendations provided in the EMGs. The Emergency Management Hazardous Materials Program (DOE O 151.1D Attachment 3) is also required.  DOE O 151.1D ( 2019a ) Attachment 3. Each Hazards Survey must. Describe the applicable potential health, safety, or environmental impacts. Include conducting a Site Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (Site THIRA). A Hazardous Material Screening Process must identify specific specific hazards. Hazardous materials and quantities that, if released, could produce impacts consistent with the definition of an Operational Emergency. The potential release of these materials to the environment requires further analysis in an EPHA. The release of hazardous materials less than the quantities listed below does not require quantitative analysis. All radioactive materials in a facility/activity must be subjected to a hazardous material screening process. Radioactive materials that may be excluded from further analysis in an EPHA include: sealed radioactive sources that are engineered to pass special form testing. materials stored in DOT Type B shipping containers with overpack. Threshold screening quantities should not be used to eliminate from consideration very low‐specific activity substances, such as depleted, natural, or low‐enriched uranium in soluble forms. In a few circumstances, the chemical toxicity of a radioactive substance may actually be higher than the radiological toxicity.  DOE Category 3 radionuclide thresholds are based on radiation dose alone. Chemical toxicity may need to be considered when applying the screening values. For practical purposes, the concern is limited to uranium of low enrichment. Unique properties and characteristics of uranium and its compounds should be considered at certain steps in the EPHA process. The following properties of uranium and its compounds strongly influence the release potential and consequences. The chemical toxicity and reactive properties of any uranium compound must be weighed against the inherent toxicity of the compound or the uranium alone. The objective of this step is to describe the hazardous materials in sufficient detail to allow accurate modeling of releases and calculation of consequences. Some uranium compounds ignite violently on contact with air, water, or hydrocarbons. Large, monolithic pieces of uranium metal may be relatively benign. Finely divided metallic uranium can react violently with nume rous other materials or self‐ignite in air. UF 6 is a solid at ambient temperature but goes directly to a gaseous state above ~270 °F at atmospheric pressure. Particle size and the range of sizes have a large effect on the radiotoxicity of inhaled materials. Larger particles will be cleared rapidly from the upper respiratory regions, delivering little radiation dose to the lung tissues. Small particles are deposited deeper in the lung and are cleared very slowly, producing a much larger dose per unit activity inhaled. Enrichment, or specific activity of the isotope mixture, often determines the relative importance of radiological and chemical toxicity. For uranium and its compounds, the following possibilities should be considered. Depending on the relative significance of radiological and chemical toxicity, the analyst may need to calculate either radiation dose, air concentration, or both for the postulated releases. For reactive species, the ability to model the transformation and depletion of material during transport is important to a sound analysis. Property and characteristics of uranium and its compounds will also need to be considered in formulating the emergency management program elements. The primary influence of uranium’s hazardous properties on the Emergency Response Organization (ERO) is in the staffing of the consequence assessment component. Staff assigned to the ERO should be knowl edgeable of, and able to quantitatively evaluate, uranium. The specific properties of the hazardous material do not significantly affect the content of this program element. As with all hazardous materials, classification of emergencies for uranium facilities should be based on the predicted consequences at specific receptor locations. If a material has two or more recogniz ed modes of effect and associated protective action criteria, classification decisions should bebased on the more limiting one. Postulated release should be classified as a Site Area Emergency. Models used to calculate and project the radiological and non‐radiological consequences of a release of uranium and it s compounds should be the same ones used in the EPHA process. If the same models are not used, the differences between outputs should be characterized and documented. Environmental monitoring capability for assessing consequences of a uranium release should conform to several general principles. Decision points based on initial screening measurements with field instruments should account for the expected levels of radon progeny. Portable survey instruments capable of performing alpha spectroscopy measurements can be used to provide rapid isotopic analysis of uranium collected on sample media. If potential exists for release of uranium compounds with high chemical toxicity (such as UF 6), it is not practical to plan to use survey teams to quantify concentrations in a plume. Consequence assessment procedures should provide for the rapid retrieval and analysis of sample media from fixed samplers that may be operating in an area affected by a uranium release. The health consequences of a given intake of uranium are highly dependent on properties such as enrichment, particle size, and solubility. The Protective Action Guides (PAGs) published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA, 2016) have been adopted by DOE as its basic protective action criteria for planning and response. Emergency worker exposure (total dose incurred over entire response) Guideline: 5 rem (50 mSv) /year (or greater under exceptional circumstances) Intermediate Phase Relocation of the public PAG: 2 rem (20 mSV) projected dose in the first year. Food interdictiong: 0.5 rem (5mSv)/year projected whole body dose. Alternative drinking water: pending finalization of proposal This guidance does not address or impact site cleanups occurring under other statutory authorities such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Superfund program. Late Phase Cleanupi Planning Guidance: Brief description of planning process (See EPA, 2016 Section 5.1) Doses to emergency workers above 5 rem (50 mSv) may be unavoidable and are generally approved by competent authority. Each emergency worker should be fully informed of the risks of exposure they may experience and trained, to the extent feasible, on actions to take. Each emergency worker should make an informed decision as to how much radiation risk they are willing to accept to save lives. This cleanup process does not rely on and does not affect any authority, including the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) and the National Contingency Plan (NCP) Emergency management program should include planning for the quantification of exposure, diagnosis of health effects, and treatment. Medical facilities providing emergency medical suppor t should be provided with references relating to uranium toxicity and treatment protocols. Criteria for implementing treatments such as surgical excision of contaminated tissue or use of chelating agents should be discussed with the medica l staff. The specific properties of the hazardous material do not significantly affect the content of this program element. Except for instruments and analysis methods used in consequence assessment, specialized facilities and equipment will not be required to meet the emergency management program needs of uranium facilities. Equipment and analytical techniques for detection and measurement of uranium in environmental sample media should have sufficient sensitivity. Nuclear facilities are deactivated by placing the facility in a safe and stable condition. Decommissioning generally takes place after deactivation, and includes surveillance and maintenance, decontamination, and/or dismantlement. The ultimate goal of decommissioning is unrestricted release or restricted use of the site. Decontamination and decommissioning of a DOE uranium facility require adherence to a complex array of regulations and policies. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) are the two main regulatory programs. The EPA or the State may have RCRA authority over actions taken at the facility during decommissioning. This may include authority to review documents, set timetables, or require specific closure or corrective actions. Even if a facility does not have a RCRA permit, RCRA requirements may be applicable and relevant or appropriate. Executive Order 12580, Superfund Implementation, delegated authority to the Secretary of Energy for evaluating whether conditions at sites under the jurisdiction, custody, or control of DOE meet the CERCLA definition of significant threat of release of hazardous substances. If so, DOE is authorized to co nduct response activities consistent with 40 CFR Part 300, National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. For sites listed on the National Priorities List, t he EPA has responsibility for ensuring that actions taken by DOE comply with CerCLA requirements. An environmental assessment (EA) may be prepared to assist in making this determin ation. The EA or EIS must discuss the amount of material that will remain onsite and its effect. The alternatives will include retaining radioactive material onsite under DOE control, cleaning the site to a level that would be acceptable for unrestricted release. The management and disposal of radioactive waste resulting from environmental restoration activities, including decommissioning, must meet the substantive requirements for DOE O 435.1 Chg 2 , Radioactive Waste Management (2021a) 10 CFR Part 835.2: radioactive waste must be appropriately managed so as to protect the public from exposure to radiation.  DOE Order 430.1C Chg 2 , Real Property Asset Management (2020b) directs that acquisition, sustainment, recapitalization, and disposal is balanced to ensure real property assets are available, utilized, and in suitable cond ition to accomplish DOE missions.  DOE Order 458.1 Ch g 4 (2020a) provides radiological protection requirements and guidelines for release and clearance of property and management, storage, and disposal of the wastes at DOE sites. The basic public dose limit for exposure to residual radioactive material is not to exceed a total effective dose (TED) of 100mrem (1mSv) in a year.  DOE Order 458.1 requires radiological activities to be conducted so that exposure to members of the public to ionizing radiation will not cause a TED of greater than 100 mrem in a year. In addition to public dose limits, a documented ALARA process must be implemented for decommissioning activities. This process must consider DOE sources, modes of exposure, and all pathways which could result in the release of radioactive materials.  DOE O 458.1 applies dose constraints to each specific clearance of property for any actual or likely future use of the property. For real property, the dose constraint is set at a total effective dose of 25 mrem above background in any calendar year. Authorized limits must be established and approved for clearance of any property containing or potentially containing radioactive material. Authorized limits must be developed in accordance with DOE O 458.1 Chg 4 (2020a ), ALARA requirements. They must be based on the applicable dose constraint, supported by a complete exposure pathway analysis using appropriate methodologies, techniques, parameters, and models.  DOE O 458.1 Chg (2020a ), pre‐approved authorized limits may be used instead of developing specific authorized limits. For uranium facilities, the preapproved Surface Contamination Guidelines are listed in Table 10‐1. Survey and Monitoring Survey and monitoring to support decommissioning activities must meet measurement or data quality objectives. Design of the facility should allow easy decommissioning of equipment and materials. Survey and monitoring instrumentation must be capable of detecting and quantifying residual radioactive material. Details on designing facilities for ease of decommissioned are discussed in the following sections. Less permeable building materials are more easily decontaminated. If there are cracks through which contaminated solutions have penetrated, the entire structure may need to be disposed of as radioactive waste. Metal surfaces may also require decontamination. If feasible, all stainless steel that will come into contact with uranium should be electro‐polished before being placed into service. Metal roofs are easiest to decontaminate, but even these may contribute to the volume of radioactive waste unless unusual measures are taken to clean them. Interior surfaces are most easily cleaned if they were completely primed and painted before the introduction of radioactive materials into the facility. The design of the ventilation system will depend on the operations conducted in the facility. Carpets are not recommended because they are difficult to clean and survey and bulky to dispose of. Adequate air flow for all operations and good design practices will help keep the facility clean during operations. Fiberglass duct work may present a fire hazard and may be more difficult to decontaminate than stainless steel. Welded joints are less likely to collect contamination than bolted ones. Filters should be positioned in ventilation systems to minimize contamination of ductwork. Contaminated effluents may require excavation during decommissioning. Particular attention should be paid to storm runoff from roofs, storage areas, contaminated equipment storage, and liquid waste treatment impoundments. To minimize hand jackhammer work, floor drains should not be enclosed in concrete. it is b est to run pipes in chases or tunnels that have been lined with stainless steel. Nonfunctional equipment is moved out when it is no longer needed and work surfaces are kept free of spreadable contamination. Other features include the following: minimizing service piping, conduits, and ductwork, caulking or sealing all cracks, crevices, and joints. Planning for facility decommissioning should be initiated during the design phase for new facilities and before termination of operations for existing operational facilities. Using modular radiation shielding, in lieu of or in addition to monolithic shielding walls, and using lifting lugs on large tanks and equipment. Determination of the natural background levels of radiation and of the background and fallout radionuclides is a critical step in decommissioning. These levels are best determined before the facility becomes operational. Spills, pipe and tank leaks, ventilation failures, burial of low‐level radioactive or potentially radioactive materials onsite, or other actions will also be important. 10.5.2 Post‐Operational Activities DOE program organizations shall identify contaminated facilities under their jurisdiction, document the potential for reuse and recovery of materials and equipment. Deactivation operations, such as removing all high‐level waste and stored hazardous materials, should be performed by the facility operator as part of decommissioning. Decommissioning activities are divided into four phases: site characterization, environmental review process, general decommissioning planning, and decommissionsing operations. The site characterization process includes a thorough physical, chemical, and radiological characterization to fulfill the requirements of NEPA and RCRA/CERCLA. Site characterizations are part of the remedial investigations/feasibility studies (RI/FS) under CERCLA. Guidance for conducting site characterizations can be found in EPA/540/G‐89/004. The background survey information (i.e., direct rad iation levels and concentrations of potential radionuclide contaminants in construction) is collected. The scoping or preliminary site characterization study should be performed to identify the potential radionuclide contaminants at the site. Background levels should be determined at onsite or immediately offsite locations that are unaffected by operations. The detailed characterization survey will more precisely define the extent and magnitude of contamination. The first step in decommissioning planning is the development of a series of absolute criteria. These will necessarily include such items as compliance with DOE regulations and Orders, EPA regulations, interagency agreements, and other statutes. They may also include commitments to states, landowners, or others, or provisions of a Record of Decision. Scoping meetings may be held to determine the decommissioning criteria and the alternatives to be considered. Other high-value criteria may also be established. Most of the analysis effort should be expended on those options that fulfill the absolute criteria so they can be ranked. General options would typically include the following. Decontamination is the preferred approach to decommissioning uranium‐contaminated facilities. Safe Storage is the alternative in which nuclear facilities are placed and maintained in such a condition that the structure and contents can be safely stored. This alternative is generally considered when the following conditions occur: 1. Low‐level waste disposal capacity is inadequate to implement DECON. 2. An adjacent operating nuclear facility would be adversely affected if the DECON alternative were implemented. 3. A positive benefit would be derived through a limited period of radioactive decay.  entombed structure is maintained under appropriate continued surveillance until the radioactivity decays to a level permitting unrestricted release. The maximum allowable time in entombment should be less than 100 years. Conversion of a facility for alternate nuclear or other controlled use has sometimes been considered a decommissioning mode. Final disposition should consider the residual radioactivity onsite. The project plan should include the following: a. physical, chemical, and radiological characterization data or references to such data; b. a summary evaluation of decommissioning alternatives for the facility, including the preferred alternatives; c. plans for meeting requirements from the environmental review process; d. radiological criteria to be used; e. development of a health and safety plan for decommissioned. Decommissioning operations shall be conducted according to the approved decommissioning project plan. Remediation control surveys (Berger 1992) should be conducted to guide the cleanup in the real‐time. The availability of a final disposal facility for the radioactive waste, hazardous waste, or mixed waste should be considered. The volume of waste and the associated cost of decommissioning the waste will be greatly reduced if equipment can be cleaned up and disposed of as either non‐radioactive waste or as non‐TRU waste. Numerous techniques have been developed for decontamination of equipment and materials. Established techniques and the latest technology should be considered in minimizing the quantity of contaminated equipment that requires disposal. The extent of the radiological control program will depend on the selected decommissioning alternative. The type and amount of radioactive contaminated material, hazardous waste, and mixed waste will also be considered. Entombment is not a viable alternative for decommissioned uranium‐ contaminated facilities. A final radiological and chemical survey report (or an independent verification survey report) and a project final report should be prepared. The report should include a description of the project, the final status of the property, and the lessons learned from the project. DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 214 10.5.4 Post‐Decommissioning Activities A confirmatory survey typically addresses from 1% to 10% of the site. The responsible program organization should ensure any necessary long‐term maintenance and surveillance or other safety controls are provided for the decommissioned property. Decommissioning activities shall be conducted according to the applicable requirements of 10.5. Decommissioning activities took place in several types of uranium facilities. Equipment decontaminated, dismantled, or removed included glove boxes, fume hoods, laboratory equipment, piping. The quality assurance program for decommissioning activities should follow the guidelines in DOE Order 414.1D Chg 2 , Quality Assurance ( 2020d ). Decontamination techniques included wiping with a damp cloth, strippable paint, acid wash, and removal of soil and sediments. Waste management planning should begin early in the decommissioning planning stages. Temporary contamination enclosures are effective in controlling contamination during size reduction of large equipment. Decommissioning operations must be prepared for changes in regulatory criteria and implementation of these new criteria. Personnel need to recognize the possibility of encountering elevated levels of contamination in unexpected locations. It is necessary to establish and document criteria for implementing regulations in accordance with 10 CFR § 835.101. Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) 2015. TLVs, Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices. American National Standards Institute. 1979. Reactor Emergency Radiological Monitoring Instrumentation. ANSI N320‐1979 (R1993). New York, New York. American National Standards Institute. 1997. Criticality Accident Alarm System. ANSI/ANS‐8.3‐1997 (R2017). American Nuclear Society, LaGrange Park, Illinois. 1998. Nuclear Criticality Safety in Operations with Fissionable Materials Outside Reactors. American National Standards Institute. 2011. Performance Criteria for Radiobioassay. 2013. Dosimetry for Criticality Accidents. 2014. American National Standard for Radiation Protection Instrumentation. Test and Calibration, Portable Survey Instruments. IEEE/ANSI N323AB‐2013. American National Standards Institute. 2015. American National Standard Practices for Respirator Protection. 2021. Sampling and Monitoring Releases of Airborne Radioactive Substances from the Stacks and Ducts of Nuclear Facilities. 2022. Personnel Dosimetry Performance – Criteria for Testing. "Fission Product Transport Processes in Reactor Accidents. ” May 22‐26, Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia. Manual for Conducting Radiological Surveys in Support of License Termination. Draft Report for Comment. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC. MCNP‐ A General Monte Carlo Code for Neutron and Photon Transport, Version 3A. LA7396‐M, Rev. 2. Carbaugh, E. H. 1994. Hanford Internal Dosimetry Project Manual. PNL‐7001, Rev. 1. Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA. 1988. Nuclide Composition of Chernobyl Hot Particles. In: Hot Particle from the Chernobyl Fallout. Proc. Int. Workshop, Theuern, October 1987. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 2016. PAG Manual: Protection Action Guides for Planning Guidance for Radiological Incidents. Eve, I.S. 1966. A Review of the Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract in Relation to Radiation Doses from Radioactive Materials. Graham, S. G., and S. Kirkham 1983. Identification of 241Am in the Axillary Lymph Nodes with an Intrinsic Germanium Detector. International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) 1959. Report of Committee II on Permissible Dose for Internal Radiation. 1964. Recommendations of the International Commission onRadiological Protection. 1975. Report. of the Task Group on Reference Man. 1977. Recommendation of the World Health Organization (WHO) 1979. Limits for the Limits for internal radiation. International Commission on Radiological Protection. Intakes of Radionuclides by Workers: ICRP Publication 30. 1987. Data for Use in Protection Against External Radiation. Ann. ICRp 17 (2‐3). 1989. Individual Monitoring for Intakes. of Radions by Workers. Design and Interpretation. I CRP Publication 54. 1994a. Human Respiratory Tract Model for Radiological. Protection. Age Dependent Doses to Members of the Public from Intakes of Radionuclides: Part 3 Ingestion Dose Coefficient. ICRP Publication 69, Ann. I CRP 25 (1). International Commission on Radiation Protection. 1995b. Age‐Dependent Doses. to Members Of The Public from Intake of Radions: Part 4 Inhalation Dose. Radiation Protection Instrumentation – Alpha, beta and alpha/beta (beta energy >60 keV) contamination meters and monitors. International Organization for Standardization. Nuclear Energy – Reference Beta Particle Radiation. ISO 6980:2006 (R2015). Geneva, Switzerland. The Perfect Internal Dosimetry Code is published by Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, Wisconsin. The code was developed by the U.S. Department of Energy in the 1980s and 1990s. It is the basis for the AERIN code used at LLNL. Lawrence, J. N. P. 1984. Uranium Internal Exposure Evaluation Based on Urine Assay Data, LA‐10246‐MS. 1987. Some Further PUQFUA Studies . In Proceedings of the Department of Energy Workshop on Radiobioassay and Internal Dosimetry, pp 107‐122. 1994. Practical Issues in Discriminating between Environmental and. Uranium Hexafluoride is considered a Hazard Category 3 Radionuclide by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Los Alamos National Laboratory has a Uranium Urinalysis Bioassay Program. The lab has a nuclear weapons stockpile of more than 1,000 pounds of uranium. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. 1987a. Use of Bioassay Procedures for Assessment of Internal Radionuclide Deposition. 1987b. Recommendations on Limits for Exposure to Plutonium. 1988. Operational Health Physics Training. Uranium Hexaflouride is a radioactive substance. It is used in nuclear power plants. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has approved the use of U.S. nuclear weapons. The NIST has approved U.N. nuclear power stations for use in the production of electricity. Health Physics Manual of Good Practices for Uranium Facilities. EG&G Idaho, Idaho Falls, ID. 1982. Procedures for Calibrating Neutron Personnel Dosimeters. NBS Special Publication 633, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC. 1994. Internal Dosimetry Monitoring Equipment: Present and Future. NUREG/CR‐5550. C. S. Sims, C. S., and H. W. Dickson. 1979. Nuclear Accident Dosimetry Intercomparison Studies at the Health Physics Research Reactor. Health Physics 57(3):439‐448. 1994. Use of Multi‐Compartment Models of Retention for Internally Deposited Radionuclides. An Extended Tabulation of Effective Dose Equivalent from Neutrons Incident on a Male Anthropomorphic Phantom. Health Physics 65(4):405‐ 413. 1992. Code for Internal Dosimetry (Cindy Version 1.2). PNL‐7493, Pt. 1, Rev. 1. Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA. U.S. Department of Energy. 2000. Decommissioning Handbook: Procedures and Practices for Decommissionsing. Washington, DC. 2001a. Radioactive Waste Management. DOE O 435.1.1, Chg 1 (R2007). Washington, D.C. U.S. Department of Energy. Protection Programs Guide for use with Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 835, Occupational Radiation Protection, DOE G 441.1‐1C, Admin Chg 1. 2009a. General Employees Radiological Training. DOE‐ HDBK‐1131‐ 2007, CN 1.  DOE G 441.1‐1C Chg 1 (Admin Chg) . Washington, D. C., U.S. Department of Energy 2011b. Radiological Control Technician Training Program DOE‐HDBK‐1122‐ 2009, CN 2. U.S. Department of Energy. 2017a. Guide to Good Practices for Occupational Radiological Protection in Uranium Facilities. 2017b. Radiological Control , DOE‐STD‐1098‐2017, Washington DC. 2017c . Title 10 Code of Federal Regulation, Part 1008. Records Maintained on Individuals (Privacy Act) U.S. Department of Energy 2019b. Facility Safety. DOE O 420.1C, Chg 3.1D Chg 1. 2020a. Radiation Protection of the Public and Environment. DOE Order 458.1, Ch g 4.1. 2020d. Quality Assurance. U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration 2011. Guidance on Using Release Fraction and Modern Dosimetric Information Consistently with DOE STD 1027‐92. Hazard Categorization and Accident Analysis Techniques for Compliance with DOE Order 5480.23, Nuclear Safety Analysis Reports. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1988. Guidance for Conducting Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies Under CERCLA. 1992. Manual of Protective Action Guides and Protective Actions for Nuclear Incidents. 2002. Final Generic Environmental Impact Statement (GEIS) on Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities. Wrenn, M.E., Bertelli, L., Durbin, P.W., Singh, N.P., Lipsztein, J.L., and Eckerman, K.F. 1994. A Comprehensive Metabolic Model for Uranium Metabolism and Dosimetry Based on Human and Animal Data. Wrenn et al., 1994. The Calculation of Dose from External Photon Exposures Using Reference Human Phantoms and Monte Carlo Methods. Part VII: Organ Doses Due to Parallel and Environmental Exposure Geometries. Air sampling: A form of air monitoring in which an air sample is collected and analyzed at a later time. airborne radioactive material: Radioactive material in any chemical or physical form that is dissolved, mixed, suspended or otherwise entrained in air. alarm set point: The count rate at which a continuous air monitor will alarm.  ambient air: The general air in the area of interest. breathing zone air monitoring: A form of air monitoring that is used to detect and quantify the radiological conditions of air. continuous air monitor (CAM): An instrument that continuously samples and measures the levels of airborne radioactive materials on a "real‐time" basis. Department of Energy operations: Those activities for which DOE has authority over environmental, safety, and health protection requirements. Department of Energy site: Either a tract owned by DOE or a tract leased or otherwise made available to the Federal Government. DOE‐STD‐1136‐2017 B ‐ 2 detector: A device or component designed to produce a quantifiable response to ionizing radiation.  exposure: The general condition of being subjected to ionizing radiation. In this document, exposure does not refer to the radiological physics concept of charge liberated per unit mass of air. fixed contamination: Radioactive material that has been deposited onto a surface and cannot be readily removed by nondestructive means.  grab sampling: A single sample removed from the workplace air over a short time interval, typically less than 1 hour. intake: The amount of radionuclide taken into the body by inhalation, absorption through intact skin, injection, ingestion, or through wounds. high‐efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter: Throwaway extended pleated medium dry‐type filter. MDA: The smallest amount (activity or mass) of an analyte in a sample that will be detected with a probability, B, of non‐detection. MDA is used to determine whether a program has adequate detection capability. The MDA will be greater than or equal to the decision level (DL) Radioactive material: Any material that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation (e.g., X‐ or gamma rays, alpha or beta particles, neutrons) radioactive material also includes materials onto which radioactive material is deposited or into which it is incorporated. portable air sampler: An air sampling designed to be moved from area to area. radiation‐generating device (RDG): The collective term for devices which produce ionizing Radiation. Radiological work permit (RWP): The permit that identifies radiological conditions, establishes worker protection and monitoring requirements, and contains specific approvals for radiological work activities. real‐time air monitoring: Collection and real-time analysis of the workplace atmosphere using continuous air monitors (CAMs) refresher training: The training scheduled on the alternate year when full retraining is not completed for Radiological worker I and Radiological Worker II personnel. Radioactive material that can be removed from surfaces by nondestructive means, such as casual contact, wiping, brushing, or washing. Source-specific air sampling: Collection of an air sample near an actual or likely release point. survey: An evaluation of the radiological conditions and potential hazards.  workplace monitoring: The measurement of radioactive material and/or direct radiation levels in areas that could be routinely occupied by workers. measurements or calculations of levels of radiation, or concentrations or quantities of radioactive Material present. (DOE‐STD‐1098)
